# Intrinsic and Extrinsic Properties

> I have some of my properties purely in virtue of the way I am. (My
> mass is an example.) I have other properties in virtue of the way I
> interact with the world. (My weight is an example.) The former are the
> intrinsic properties, the latter are the extrinsic properties. This
> seems to be an intuitive enough distinction to grasp, and hence the
> intuitive distinction has made its way into many discussions in
> ethics, philosophy of mind, metaphysics and even epistemology.
> Unfortunately, when we look more closely at the intuitive distinction,
> we find reason to suspect that it conflates a few related
> distinctions, and that each of these distinctions is somewhat
> resistant to analysis.

## Introduction

The standard way to introduce the distinction between intrinsic and
extrinsic properties is by the use of a few platitudes. Stephen Yablo
provides perhaps the most succinct version: "You know what an intrinsic
property is: it's a property that a thing has (or lacks) regardless of
what may be going on outside of itself." [-@Yablo1999 479]. David Lewis
provides a more comprehensive list of platitudes.

> A sentence or statement or proposition that ascribes intrinsic
> properties to something is entirely about that thing; whereas an
> ascription of extrinsic properties to something is not entirely about
> that thing, though it may well be about some larger whole which
> includes that thing as part. A thing has its intrinsic properties in
> virtue of the way that thing itself, and nothing else, is. Not so for
> extrinsic properties, though a thing may well have these in virtue of
> the way some larger whole is. The intrinsic properties of something
> depend only on that thing; whereas the extrinsic properties of
> something may depend, wholly or partly, on something else. If
> something has an intrinsic property, then so does any perfect
> duplicate of that thing; whereas duplicates situated in different
> surroundings will differ in their extrinsic properties. [@Lewis1983b
> 111-112 in reprint]

As we shall see, the last claim Lewis makes (that duplicates never
differ with respect to intrinsic properties) is somewhat controversial.
The other way to introduce the subject matter is by providing examples
of paradigmatic intrinsic and extrinsic properties. One half of this
task is easy: everyone agrees that being an uncle is extrinsic, as is
being six metres from a rhodadendron. The problem with using this method
to introduce the distinction is that there is much less agreement about
which properties are intrinsic. Lewis has in several places
[-@Lewis1983b; -@Lewis1986a; -@Lewis1988c] insisted that shape
properties are intrinsic, but one could hold that an object's shape
depends on the curvature of the space in which it is embedded, and this
might not even be intrinsic to that space [@Nerlich1979], let alone the
object. Lewis also mentions charge and internal structure as being
examples of intrinsic properties.

### Philosophical Importance

The distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic properties plays an
essential role in stating several interesting philosophical problems.
Historically, the most prominent of these has to do with notions of
intrinsic value. G. E. [@Moore1903] noted that we can make a distinction
between things that are good in themselves, or possess intrinsic value,
and those that are good as a means to other things. To this day there is
still much debate over whether this distinction can be sustained
[@Feldman1998; @Kagan1998], and if it can which kinds of things possess
intrinsic value @Krebs1999. In particular, one of the central topics in
contemporary environmental ethics is the question of which kinds of
things (intelligent beings, conscious beings, living things, species,
etc) might have intrinsic value. While this is the oldest (and still
most common) use of the intrinsic/extrinsic distinction in philosophy,
it has not played much role in the discussions of the distinction in
metaphysics, to which we now turn.

As P. T.@Geach1969 noted, the fact that some object *a* is not *F*
before an event occurs but is *F* after that event occurs does not mean
that the event constitutes, in any deep sense, a change in *a*. To use a
well-worn example, at the time of Socrates's death Xanthippe became a
widow; that is, she was not a widow before the event of her husband's
death, but she was a widow when it ended. Still, though that event
constituted (or perhaps was constituted by) a change in Socrates, it did
not in itself constitute a change in Xanthippe. Geach noted that we can
distinguish between real changes, such as what occurs in Socrates when
he dies, from mere changes in which predicates one satisfies, such as
occurs in Xanthippe when Socrates dies. The latter he termed 'mere
Cambridge' change. There is something of a consensus that an object
undergoes real change in an event iff there is some **intrinsic**
property they satisfied before the event but not afterwards.

David @Lewis1986a [@Lewis1988c] built on this point of Geach's to mount
an attack on **endurantism**, the theory that objects persist by being
wholly located at different times, and that there can be strict identity
between an object existing at one time and one existing at another time.
Lewis argues that this is inconsistent with the idea that objects
undergo real change. If the very same object can be both *F* (at one
time) and not *F* (at another), this means that *F*-ness must be a
relation to a time, but this means that it is not an intrinsic property.
So any property that an object can change must be extrinsic, so nothing
undergoes real change. Lewis says that this argument supports the rival
theory of **perdurantism**, which says that objects persist by having
different temporal parts at different times. While this argument is
controversial (see @Haslanger1989, @Johnston1987 and @Lowe1988 for some
responses), it does show how considerations about intrinsicness can
resonate within quite different areas of metaphysics.

The other major area where the concept of intrinsicness has been put to
work is in stating various supervenience theses. Frank @Jackson1998
defines physicalism in terms of duplication and physical duplication,
which are in turn defined in terms of intrinsic properties. This
definition builds upon a similar definition offered by @Lewis1983e.
Similarly, Jaegwon @Kim1982 defines a mind/body supervenience thesis in
terms of intrinsic properties. As Theodore @Sider1993-SIDAAS notes, the
simplest way to define the **individualist** theory of mental content
that Tyler @Burge1979 attacks is as the claim that the content of a
thinker's propositional attitudes supervenes on the intrinsic properties
of the thinker. And many **internalist** theories in epistemology are
based around the intuition that whether a thinker is justified in
believing some proposition supervenes on the intrinsic properties of the
thinker.

Most of the philosophical applications are independent of the precise
analysis of intrinsicness, but work on this analysis has helped clarify
debates in two ways. First, the distinction between the two notions of
intrinsicness, discussed in section 2 below, helps clarify a number of
these debates. More concretely, Theodore Sider's (2003) observation that
most of the properties in folk theory are 'maximal' and hence not
intrinsic provides a strong argument against various theories that
appeal to the intuitive intrinsicness of some everyday property.

Though these are the most prominent uses of the intrinsic/extrinsic
distinction in philosophy, they by no means exhaust its uses. Many
applications of the distinction are cited by I. L. @Humberstone1996,
including the following. George @Schlesinger1990 uses the distinction
between intrinsic and extrinsic properties to state a non-trivial
version of Mill's principle of the uniformity of nature, though
Schlesinger gives his distinction a different name. Wlodzimierz
@Rabinowicz1979 uses the distinction to formulate principles of
universalizability for moral principles and natural laws. And E.Â J.
@Khamara1988 uses a distinction between relational and non-relational
properties to state a non-trivial version of the principle of Identity
of Indiscernibles.

### Global and Local

Whether a property is intrinsic, and whether some individual that has
that property has it intrinsically, are different issues. The property
*being square or married* is no doubt an extrinsic property; but it is a
property that is had intrinsically by all squares (assuming *being
square* is intrinsic). Once we have these two concepts, a 'global'
concept of intrinsicness of properties, and a 'local' concept of a
particular object being intrinsically such as to possess some property,
we might wonder how they are connected. (The names 'global' and 'local'
are taken from @Humberstone1996). In particular, we might wonder which
of these should be primary in an analysis of intrinsicness.

At first glance, the principles (GTL) and (LTG) seem to connect the two
concepts.

(GTL)

:   If *F* is a (globally) intrinsic property, and *a* is *F*, then *a*
    is intrinsically *F*

(LTG)

:   If every *a* that is *F* is intrinsically *F*, then *F* is a
    (globally) intrinsic property.

(GTL) is undoubtedly true, but (LTG) is more problematic. If the
quantifier in it is actualist (i.e. only ranges over actual objects),
then it is clearly false. Let *F* be the property *being square or being
inside a golden mountain*. Even if the quantifier is possibilist, it is
not clear that (LTG) should be true. For a problematic example, let *F*
be the property *being square or being such that the number 21 does not
exist*. Every possible object that is *F* is square, and hence
intrinsically *F*, but it is not clear that *F* is an intrinsic
property. This question (like a few others we will discuss below) turns
on the metaphysics of properties. If two properties that are necessarily
coextensive are identical (as Lewis believes), or are guaranteed to be
alike in whether they are intrinsic or extrinsic (as Sider 1993 argues),
then *F* will be intrinsic. If properties can be individuated more
finely than this, and if their intrinsicness or otherwise turns on this
fine-grained individuation, then maybe *F* is not intrinsic. We will
return to this issue in some of the discussions below.

## Notions of Intrinsicness

Many different distinctions have been called the intrinsic/extrinsic
distinction. As J. Michael @Dunn1990 notes, some authors have used
'intrinsic' and 'extrinsic' to mean 'essential' and 'accidental'. Dunn
is surely right in saying that this is a misuse of the terms. A more
interesting distinction is noted by Brian [@Ellis2001 discussed in
Humberstone (1996)]. Ellis suggests we should distinguish between
properties that objects have independently of any outside forces acting
on them (what we will call the Ellis-intrinsic properties), and those
that they have in virtue of those outside forces (the Ellis-extrinsic
properties). For many objects (such as, say, a stretched rubber band)
their shape will be dependent on the outside forces acting on them, so
their shape will be Ellis-extrinsic. If one is committed to the idea
that shapes are intrinsic, one should think this means that the
distinction between the Ellis-intrinsic and Ellis-extrinsic properties
is not the same as the intrinsic/extrinsic distinction. Such a judgement
may seem a little hasty, but in any case we will turn now to
distinctions that have received more attention in the philosophical
literature.

### Relational vs. Non-Relational Properties

Many writers, especially in the literature on intrinsic value, use
'relational' for the opposite of intrinsic. This seems to be a mistake
for two reasons. The first reason is that many properties seem to be
both be relational and intrinsic. For example, most people have the
property *having longer legs than arms*, and indeed seem to have this
property intrinsically, even though the property consists in a certain
relation being satisfied. Maybe the property is not intrinsic if whether
or not something is an arm or a leg is extrinsic, so perhaps this isn't
a conclusive example, but it seems troubling. As Humberstone notes, some
might respond by suggesting that a relational property is one such that
if an object has it, then it bears some relation to a distinct thing.
But this won't do either. *Not being within a mile of a rhodadendron* is
clearly relational, but does not consist in bearing a relation to any
distinct individual, as we can see by the fact that a non-rhodadendron
all alone in a world can satisfy it.

A larger problem is that it seems *being intrinsic* and *being
relational* are properties of two very different kinds of things.
Consider again the property *F*, *being square or being such that the
number 21 does not exist*. Assuming (as we do for now) that we can make
sense of the relational/non-relational distinction, *F* is a relational
property. But *F* is necessarily co-extensive with the property *being
square*, which is surely non-relational. So two necessarily co-extensive
properties can differ with respect to whether they are relational. We
can put this point a few different ways. If any two properties that are
necessarily co-extensive are identical, then being relational is not a
property of *properties*, but a property of *concepts*, or in any case
of some things individuated as finely as Fregean concepts. If we think
that intrinsicness is not a property that makes such fine distinctions,
then the relational/non-relational and intrinic/extrinsic distinctions
are quite different, for they are distinctions between different kinds
of things.

### Qualitative vs. Non-Qualitative Properties

As noted above, one of the platitudes Lewis lists when isolating the
concept of intrinsicness is that duplicates never differ with respect to
their intrinsic properties. Lewis holds a further principle that may not
be obvious from the above quote: that any property with respect to which
duplicates never differ is intrinsic. Of course, this is only true if
the quantifiers in it are interpreted as possibilist. Otherwise the
property *having a greater mass than any man that has ever existed* will
be intrinsic, since it never differs between actual duplicates. We will
assume from now on that all quantifiers are possibilist, unless
otherwise noted. And, following Humberstone, we will say that the
properties that do not differ between duplicates are the qualitative
properties, which is not to say they are not also the intrinsic
properties.

Despite this two-way connection between intrinsicness and duplication,
we do not yet have an analysis because the relevant concept of
duplication can only be (easily) analysed in terms of intrinsic
properties. In the next section we will look at the two ways Lewis has
attempted to analyse that concept and hence break into the circle. But
for now it is worth looking at some results that follow directly from
the idea that intrinsic properties are those that do not differ between
duplicates.

First, as [@Humberstone1996 227] notes, if this is our definition of
intrinsicness, then we can easily analyse local intrinsicness in terms
of global intrinsicness. An object *x* is intrinsically *P* iff all its
duplicates are *P*, that is, if all objects that have the same (global)
intrinsic properties as it does are *P*. And having this concept of
local intrinsicness is quite useful, because it lets us explain what is
right about an intuitively attractive (though ultimately mistaken) claim
about intrinsic properties. Let *P* be an intrinsic property and *Q* a
property such that an object's having *Q* is entailed by its having *P*.
One might think in those circumstances that *Q* would be intrinsic,
since its possession follows from a fact solely about the object in
question, namely that it is *P*. This isn't right in general; to see why
let *P* be the property of *being square* and *Q* be the property *being
square or being inside a golden mountain*. For some objects that are *Q*
their *Q*-ness follows from facts solely about the object, but for
others it follows from facts quite extrinsic to the object in question.
But, Humberstone notes, something similar is true. If *x* possess *P*
intrinsically, and being *P* entails being *Q*, then *x* possesses *Q*
intrinsically. This local concept of intrinsicness might also do
philosophical work; presumably the intrinsic value of an object depends
on which properties it intrinsically possesses, not on which intrinsic
properties it possesses.

Secondly, it follows from the definition that necessarily co-extensive
properties are alike in being intrinsic or not. In particular, any
property that every possible object has, such as *being such that the
number 21 exists*, will be an intrinsic property. Robert
@Francescotti1999 takes this to be a decisive mark against Lewis's
theory, but others (e.g. @Sider1993-SIDAAS, @Weatherson2001-WEAIPA) have
been willing to treat it as a philosophical discovery. It is crucial to
the proof that Lewis's theory entails that this property is intrinsic
that the quantifiers in the theory are possibilist. If we let the
quantifiers range over the right kind of impossibilities (such as the
situations of @BarwisePerry1983, or the impossible worlds of @Nolan1998)
then one can have duplicates that, for example, differ with respect to
whether the number 21 exists. Since this approach has not been developed
in any detail it is impossible to say at this time whether it would have
serious untoward consequences.

Thirdly, the duplication relation is transitive, so any duplicate of a
duplicate of David Lewis, is a duplicate of David Lewis. That means that
*being a duplicate of David Lewis* is an intrinsic property of all those
objects. While this might plausibly be a property that Lewis
intrinsically possesses, it is somewhat surprising that it is intrinsic
to all of his duplicates. @Dunn1990 reports that Lewis in conversation
said that this property (being a duplicate of David Lewis) is equivalent
to an infinite conjunction of intrinsic properties (the ones Lewis has)
so it should turn out to be intrinsic.

Conversely, assuming the metaphysics of counterpart theory, none of
these duplicates of David Lewis is David Lewis himself, so the property
*being (identical with) David Lewis* turns out to be extrinsic on this
account. Even if we drop the counterpart theory, and allow that objects
in different worlds might be strictly identical, still not all
duplicates of Lewis will be identical with Lewis, so the property *being
(identical with) David Lewis* will still not be intrinsic. It might seem
rather odd that a property so internal to Lewis should not be intrinsic.
@Yablo1999 notes that in some cases, such as this one, we can make an
argument for identity properties not being intrinsic. If it is essential
to David Lewis that he be descended from a particular zygote Z, then the
fact that something is David Lewis entails that something else is a
zygote, and any property whose possession entails the existence of other
objects is usually held to be extrinsic. Still, Yablo argues, it is very
plausible that the identity properties of some things (especially atoms)
should be intrinsic.

Finally, we can define relative notions of duplication, and hence
relative notions of intrinsicness [@Humberstone1996 238]. To give just
one interesting example, say that a property is nomically intrinsic iff
it never differs between duplicates in worlds with the same laws. Then
many dispositional properties might turn out to be nomically intrinsic,
capturing nicely the idea that they are in a sense internal to the
objects that possess them, while their manifestation depends both on
external facts, and on the laws being a certain way.

### Interior vs. Exterior Properties

J. Michael @Dunn1990 suggests that odd consequences of Lewis's theory
are sufficient to look for a new concept of intrinsicness. He suggests
that the notion of intrinsicness is governed by platitudes like the
following. "Metaphysically, an *intrinsic* property of an object is a
property that the object has by virtue of itself, depending on no other
thing. Epistemologically, an intrinsic property would be a property that
one could determine by inspection of the object itself - in particular,
for a physical object, one would not have to look outside its region of
space-time" [-@Dunn1990 178] As Dunn notes, the metaphysical definition
here is the central one, the epistemological platitude is at best a
heuristic. On this view, *being identical to X* will be intrinsic
(except in cases where *X* has essential properties rooted outside
itself), while *being a duplicate of X* will not be. Also, *having X as
a part* will be intrinsic, though it is not on Lewis's account.

Dunn argues that the appropriate logic in which to formulate claims of
intrinsicness and to investigate what consequences they have is the
relevant logic **R**, and he provides some of the details of how this
should be done. But until we see a specific formulation of the idea
(comparable in specificity to the accounts of Peter Vallentyne and
Stephen Yablo, discussed below in section 3.3), we cannot comment on its
consequences. Still, there is an intuitive distinction here, and it
clearly differs from the distinction Lewis discusses.

### Which is the real distinction?

If we grasp the three distinctions discussed above, we might well ask
which of them is the intrinsic/extrinsic distinction? It is possible
that this question has no determinate answer. Humberstone suggests that
we have three interesting distinctions here, each of which can do some
philosophical work, and there is not much interest in the issue of which
of them is called the distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic
properties. If we do decide to investigate this seriously, we should
perhaps be prepared to be disappointed - there is no guarantee that
there will be a fact of the matter which distinction the words
'intrinsic' and 'extrinsic' latch onto.

Should we just give up on identifying *the* intrinsic/extrinsic
distinction; then, on pain of having some indeterminacy in our
philosophical theories, we must reformulate the theories that are framed
using this distinction, specifying which distinction should take the
role of the intrinsic/extrinsic distinction in each case. Sider, in the
course of defending the philosophical interest of the
qualitative/non-qualitative distinction, makes a start on doing this. He
notes that in the debates about supervenience, the distinction that is
usually relevant is the qualitative/non-qualitative one. If we let
*being (identical to) X* be an intrinsic property, then most of the
supervenience theses discussed will be trivially true, because it will
be impossible to have duplicates that are different objects, and hence
impossible to have duplicates that differ with respect to the contents
of their beliefs, or the justificatory status of their beliefs, or their
phenomenal states, or whatever. But these theses are not trivially true;
so if we are to formulate the distinctions this way, we had better not
let identity properties be intrinsic *in these contexts*.

This, of course, does not show that the qualitative/non-qualitative
distinction is the only one that can do philosophical work. Indeed, when
trying to grasp what real change amounts to, it seems to be the
interior/exterior distinction that is relevant. Say that *a* has *b* as
a part, and consider the event whereby *b* is replaced in *a* by *c*,
which happens to be a duplicate of *b*. This event seems to constitute a
real change in *a*, not merely a Cambridge change, but it does not
constitute a change in qualitative properties.

## Attempts at Analysis

We will first look at two attempts to analyse the
qualitative/non-qualitative distinction, and then at two more ambitious
projects that aim to capture intrinsicness in all of its facets.

### Combinatorial Theories

As Yablo noted, if an object has a property intrinsically, then it has
it independently of the way the rest of the world is. The rest of the
world could disappear, and the object might still have that property.
Hence a *lonely* object, an object that has no wholly distinct
worldmates, could have the property. Note that in the sense relevant
here, two objects are only 'wholly distinct' if they have no parts in
common, not if they are merely non-identical. The idea is that a lonely
object could have proper parts. This is good, since *having six proper
parts* is presumably an intrinsic property. Many extrinsic properties
could not be possessed by lonely objects -- no lonely object is six
metres from a rhododendron, for example.

This suggests an analysis of intrinsicness: *F* is an intrinsic property
iff it is possible for a lonely object to be *F*. This analysis is
usually attributed to @Kim1982 (e.g. in @Lewis1983b and
@Sider1993-SIDAAS), though @Humberstone1996 dissents from this
interpretation. Both directions of the biconditional can be challenged.

Some objects change in mass over time: this is presumably an intrinsic
property of those objects. If necessitarian theories of laws are true
(as endorsed by @Ellis2001 and @Shoemaker1984), then there could not be
a world with just that object, as the conservation of matter would be
violated. If any kind of combinatorial analysis of intrinsicness can
work, we have to assume something like Hume's dictum that there are no
necessary connections between distinct existences. Indeed, all
combinatorial theories of intrinsicness do assume this, and further that
the range of what is possible can be taken as given in crafting a theory
of intrinsicness. This might be thought problematic, since the best way
to formally spell out Hume's dictum itself appeals to the concept of
intrinsicness [@Lewis1986a 87-91].

The analysis is only viable as an analysis of the
qualitative/non-qualitative distinction, since it rules that *being a
duplicate of David Lewis* is an intrinsic property. This feature, too,
is shared by all combinatorial theories of intrinsicness.

The major problem with this analysis is that the 'if' direction of the
biconditional is clearly false. As @Lewis1983b pointed out, the property
*being lonely* is had by some possible lonely objects, but it is not
intrinsic.

Rae Langton and David Lewis [-@Lewis1998Langton] designed a theory to
meet this objection. Their theory resembles, in crucial respects, the
theory sketched in an appendix to Dean Zimmerman's paper "Immanent
Causation" [@Zimmerman1997]. The two theories were developed entirely
independently. We will focus on Langton and Lewis's version here,
because it is more substantially developed, and more widely discussed in
the literature. On their theory, a property *F* is *independent of
accompaniment* iff the following four conditions are met:

1.  There exists a lonely *F*

2.  There exists a lonely non-*F*

3.  There exists an accompanied (i.e. not lonely) *F*

4.  There exists an accompanied non-*F*

Langton and Lewis's idea is that if *F* is intrinsic, then whether *or
not* an object is *F* should not depend on whether *or not* it is
lonely. So all four of these cases should be possible. Still, some
extrinsic properties satisfy all four conditions. Consider, for
instance, the property *being lonely and round or accompanied and
cubical*. A lonely sphere suffices for (a), a lonely cube for (b), an
actual cube for (c) and an actual sphere for (d). So they have to rule
out this property. They do it by the following five-step process.

First, Langton and Lewis identify a class of privileged *natural* (or
non-disjunctive) properties. @Lewis1983e had argued that we need to
recognise a distinction between natural and non-natural properties to
make sense of many debates in metaphysics, philosophy of science,
philosophy of language and philosophy of mind, and suggested a few ways
we might draw the distinction. We might take the natural properties to
be those that correspond to real universals, or those that appear in the
canonical formulations of best physics or regimented common sense, or
even take the distinction to be primitive. Langton and Lewis say that it
should not matter how we draw the distinction for present purposes, as
long as we have it, and properties like *being lonely and round or
accompanied and cubical* are not natural.

Secondly, they say properties are *disjunctive* iff they "can be
expressed by a disjunction of (conjunctions of) natural properties; but
are not themselves natural properties." Thirdly, they say a property is
*basic intrinsic* iff it is non-disjunctive and satisfies (a) through
(d). Fourthly, they say two (possible) objects are duplicates iff they
share the same basic intrinsic properties. Finally, they say *F* is an
intrinsic property iff two duplicates never differ with respect to it.

Three objections have been pressed against this view. Stephen @Yablo1999
objected to the role of natural properties in the analysis, which he
argued introduced irrelevant material, and implied that the theory was
at best *de facto*, but not *de jure*, correct. Dan Marshall and Josh
Parsons [-@Marshall2001] claimed that according to this definition, the
property *being such that a cube exists* is non-disjunctive, but it
satisfies (a) through (d), so it would be basic intrinsic, despite being
extrinsic. Theodore @Sider2001-SIDMAI claimed that the theory could not
handle *maximal* properties: properties of objects that are not shared
by their large proper parts. Sider claims that *being a rock* is such a
property: large parts of rocks are not rocks. So *being a rock* is
extrinsic, since a duplicate of a large part of a rock might be a rock
if it is separated from the rest of the rock. But, argued Sider, on some
interpretations of 'natural property' it is natural, and hence basic
intrinsic.

Brian Weatherson's [-@Weatherson2001-WEAIPA] theory was designed to meet
these three objections. In his theory, combinatorial principles of
possibility are not used to derive characteristics of individual
intrinsic properties, as Kim and Langton and Lewis do, but
characteristics of the whole set of intrinsic properties. He argues that
this set, call it *SI*, will have the following properties:

-   If *F*Â ${\in}$Â *SI*Â and *G*Â ${\in}$ *SI*, then *F and
    G*Â ${\in}$Â *SI* and *F or G*Â ${\in}$Â *SI* and *not F*Â ${\in}$Â *SI*

-   If *F*Â ${\in}$Â *SI* then *Having* n *parts that are F*Â ${\in}$Â *SI*
    and *Being entirely composed of exactly* n *things that are
    F*Â ${\in}$Â *SI*

-   If *F*Â ${\in}$Â *SI* and *G*Â ${\in}$Â *SI* and there is a possible
    world with *n*+1 pairwise distinct things, and something in some
    world is *F* and something in some world is *G*, then there is a
    world with exactly *n*+1 pairwise distinct things such that one is
    *F* and the other *n* are *G*.

-   If *F*Â ${\in}$Â *SI* and *G*Â ${\in}$Â *SI* and it is possible that
    regions with shapes *d*~1~ and *d*~2~ stand in relation *A*, and it
    is possible that an *F* wholly occupy a region with shape *d*~1~ and
    a *G* wholly occupy a region with shape *d*~2~, then there is a
    world where regions with shapes *d*~1~ and *d*~2~ stand in *A*, and
    an *F* wholly occupies the region with shape *d*~1~ and a *G* wholly
    occupies the region with shape *d*~2~.

The first two principles are closure principles on the set. The third
principle says that any two intrinsic properties that can be
instantiated can be instantiated together any number of times. And the
fourth says that if objects having two intrinsic properties can be in
two regions, and those two regions can be in a particular spatial
relation, then the regions can be in that relation while filled by
objects having those properties. The third principle suffices to show
that *being such that a cube exists* could not be in *SI*, and the
fourth to show that *being a rock* could not be.

Weatherson's theory does not entirely avoid appeals to a concept of
naturalness, though the counterexamples that prompt the appeal are now
much more recherchÃ©. Without such an appeal, then if *F* and *G* are
intrinsic properties that atoms could have, nothing in his theory rules
out the property *being simple, lonely and F or being G* from being
intrinsic. There are a few ways for the appeal to go at this point, see
@Weatherson2001-WEAIPA and @Lewis2001b for a few suggestions. The
following moves, taken directly from Langton and Lewis, will probably
work if any will. Say that the basic intrinsic properties are those
non-disjunctive properties such that their membership in *SI* is
consistent with the above four principles. Two objects are duplicates if
they do not differ with respect to basic intrinsic properties. A
property is intrinsic if it never differs between duplicates.

John @Hawthorne2001 has suggested that all these combinatorial theories
have a problem with properties of the form *being R-related to
something*, where *R* is a perfectly natural relation that is neither
reflexive nor irreflexive. Such properties are extrinsic, but Hawthorne
suggests they will satisfy all the combinatorial principles, and their
close connection to natural relations means that they will be natural
enough to cause problems for all these combinatorial approaches.

In a recent paper, Gene D. Witner, William Butchard and Kelly Trogdon
[-@WitnerButchardTrogdon2005], hereafter WBT, propose a different kind
of variation on Langton and Lewis's analysis. They agree that the core
idea of an analysis should be independence from accompaniment. But they
argue that Lewis's notion of 'naturalness' is too mysterious to deliver
a useful analysis. Instead they propose to use the idea that an
individual has some properties *in virtue of* having other properties.
Their analysis then is that *F* is intrinsic iff everything that has *F*
has *F* intrinsically, and an object *a* has *F* intrinsically iff for
every *G* such that *a* is *F* in virtue of being *G*, *G* is
independent of accompaniment.

As WBT mention, their theory needs some relatively fine judgments about
what properties are instantiated in virtue of which other properties in
order to handle some hard cases, especially Sider's examples involving
maximal properties. And they note that the theory seems to break down
altogether over some impure properties, such as *being identical to* *a*
for any *a* that can exist either alone or accompanied. This is a
property that *a* has, but doesn't have in virtue of any distinct
property. And that property is independent of accompaniment, so it is
intrinsic. But intuitively *a* could have had a distinct duplicate, so
*being identical to a* shouldn't count as intrinsic. WBT's solution is
to say that the theory is only meant to apply to pure properties. This
might not work as it stands. If *a* is the *F* then the property of
*being identical to the only actual F* will also improperly count as
intrinsic on their view for much the same reason. It might be better to
say that their analysis is intended as an analysis of *interior*
properties, rather than as an analysis of *qualitative* properties,
unlike the other combinatorial theories.

### Natural Kind Theories

In *On the Plurality of Worlds*, David Lewis presents a quite different
analysis of intrinsic properties. As with the combinatorial theory that
he and Rae Langton defend, it heavily exploits the idea that some
properties are more natural than others. In fact, it rests even more
weight on it. Here is Lewis's statement of the theory:

> \[I\]t can plausibly be said that all perfectly natural properties are
> intrinsic. Then we can say that two things are *duplicates* iff (1)
> they have exactly the same perfectly natural properties, and (2) their
> parts can be put into correspondence in such a way that corresponding
> parts have exactly the same perfectly natural properties, and stand in
> the same perfectly natural relations...Then we can go on to say that
> an *intrinsic* property is one that can never differ between
> duplicates. [@Lewis1986a 61-62]

Like the combinatorial theories, this is an attempt at analysing
qualitative intrinsicness. Anyone who thinks this is too modest an aim
to be worthwhile will be disappointed. It rests heavily on the
'plausible' claim that all perfectly natural properties are intrinsic,
and, implicitly, that the perfectly natural properties are sufficient to
characterise the world completely. The last assumption is needed because
the theory rules out the possibility that there are two objects that
share all their perfectly natural properties, but differ with respect to
some intrinsic property or other. One consequence of these assumptions
is that a world is fully characterised by the intrinsic properties of
its inhabitants and the perfectly natural relations between those
inhabitants. Lewis thinks this is true for the actual world, it is just
his doctrine of Humean supervenience. [@Lewis1986b i-xiii]. But it might
be thought a stretch to think it is true of *all* worlds.

In their paper of 1998, Langton and Lewis claim the only advantage of
their theory over Lewis's old theory is that it makes fewer assumptions
about the nature of natural properties. They also note that Lewis still
believes those assumptions, but they think it is worthwhile to have a
theory that gets by without them. It also seems that Lewis's new theory,
perhaps as amended, provides more insight into the nature of
intrinsicness.

### Contractions

Peter @Vallentyne1997 develops a theory based around the idea that *x*'s
intrinsic properties are those properties it would have if it were alone
in the world. He defines a *contraction* of a world as "a world
'obtainable' from the original one solely by 'removing' objects from
it." (211) As a special case of this, an *x*-*t* contraction, where *x*
is an object and *t* a time, is "a world 'obtainable' from the original
one by, to the greatest extent possible, 'removing' all objects wholly
distinct from *x*, all spatial locations not occupied by *x*, and all
times (temporal states of the world) except *t*, from the world." (211)
Vallentyne allows that there might not be unique *x*-*t* contraction;
sometimes we can remove one of two objects, but not both, from the world
while leaving *x*, so there will be one *x*-*t* contraction which has
one of these in it, and another that has the other.

He then says that *F* is intrinsic iff for all *x*, *t*, all *x*-*t*
contractions are such that *Fx* is true in the contraction iff it is
true in the actual world. In short, a property is intrinsic to an object
iff removing the rest of the world doesn't change whether the object has
the property.

Vallentyne notes that this definition will not be very enlightening
unless we understand the idea of a contraction. This seems related to
the objection Langton and Lewis [-@Lewis1998Langton] urge against
Vallentyne. They say that Vallentyne's account reduces to the claim that
a property is intrinsic iff possession of it never differs between an
object and its lonely duplicates, a claim they think is true but too
trivial to count as an analysis. Their position is that we cannot
understand contractions without understanding duplication, but if we
understand duplication then intrinsicness can be easily defined, so
Vallentyne's theory is no advance.

Stephen @Yablo1999 argues that this criticism is too quick. Vallentyne
should best be understood as working within a very different
metaphysical framework to Lewis. For Lewis, no (ordinary) object exists
at more than one world, so Vallentyne's contractions, being separate
worlds, must contain separate objects. Hence *x*-*t* contractions can be
nothing other than lonely duplicates, and the theory is trivial. Yablo
suggests that the theory becomes substantive relative to a metaphysical
background in which the very same object can appear in different worlds.
(In chapter 4 of *Plurality* Lewis has a few arguments against this
idea, and Yablo has interesting responses to these arguments. A thorough
investigation of this debate would take us too far from the topic.) If
this is the case then we can get a grip on contractions without thinking
about duplications - the *x*-*t* contraction of a world is the world
that contains *x* itself, and as few other things as possible.

Josh @Parsons2007 argues against this approach. He says that there is no
good way to understand sentences like "In *w*, Prince Philip is not a
husband", where *w* is the world consisting of just Prince Philip. More
generally, we cannot make sense of what extrinsic properties *x* has in
the *x*-*t* contraction.

### Non-relationality

Robert @Francescotti1999 recently outlined an analysis that takes the
concept of intrinsicness as non-relationality to be primary.
Francescotti takes a property to be extrinsic iff an object possesses it
in virtue of its relations to other objects. So *being a duplicate of
Jack* and *being such that the number 17 exists* are extrinsic, while
*being identical to Jack* and *being a vertebrate* (i.e. *having a
vertebral column*) are intrinsic. As noted above, this means that we
must either have a hyper-intensional notion of properties, or we say
that intrinsicness is a property of concepts, not of properties.
Francescotti takes the former option.

Francescotti notes that not all relational properties are extrinsic.
*Having a vertebral column*, for instance, seems to be relational in
that it consists of a relation to a vertebral column, but it is also an
intrinsic property. So he focuses on relations to distinct objects. The
definition of intrinsicness goes as follows. First we define a
d-relational property. *F* is d-relational iff:

1.  there is a relation *R*, and an item *y*, such that (i) *x*'s having
    *F* consists in *x*'s bearing *R* to *y*, and (ii) *y is distinct
    from x*; or

2.  there is a relation *R*, and a class of items *C*, such that (i)
    *x*'s having *F* consists in there being some member of *C* to which
    *x* bears *R*, and (ii) at least one member of *C* to which *x*
    bears *R* is distinct from *x*; or

3.  there is a relation *R*, and a class of items *C*, such that (i)
    *x*'s having *F* consists in *x*'s bearing *R* to every member of
    *C*, and (ii) it is possible that there is a member of *C* that is
    distinct from *x*.

We then define intrinsic properties as being those that are not
d-relational.

> *F* is an intrinsic property of *x* =~df~ *x* has *F*, and *F* is not
> a d-relational property of *x*.

Francescotti's theory provides intuitively plausible answers to all the
cases he considers, provided of course that we identify the
intrinsic/non-intrinsic distinction with the relational/non-relational
distinction, rather than one of the other two distinctions considered in
section two. Like the other three theories, it has one unexplained (or
perhaps underexplained) primitive, in this case the *consists-in*
relation. As Francescotti notes, following @Khamara1988, it won't do to
say *x*'s having *F* consists in *x*'s bearing *R* to *y* just in case
it is necessary that *Fx* iff *xRy*. That makes it too easy for having a
property to consist in some necessary being (say God, or the numbers)
being a certain way. Rather, he says, "*x*'s having *F*, consists in the
event or state, *x*'s having *G*, just in case *x*'s having *F* is the
very same event or state as *x*'s having *G*." (599) Whether this can
handle all the hard cases seems to depend how the theory of identity
conditions for events and states turns out. (See the entries on Donald
Davidson and events for some start on this.)
