# Vagueness and Pragmatics

If Louis is a penumbral case of baldness, then many competent speakers
will not be disposed to assent to any of (1) through (3), though they
will assent to (4).

A good theory of vagueness should explain these differing reactions.
Most theorists have something like explanations of our reactions to (1)
and (2). Some are built to explain our reactions to (3) -- theories that
advocate reforming classical logic to accommodate data concerning
vagueness are paradigm cases of this. Some are built to explain our
reactions to (4) -- theories that stress penumbral connections, like
supervaluationism and epistemicism are paradigm cases of this. What is
trickier is to provide an explanation of our reactions to both (3) and
(4). Here I will outline a pragmatic explanation of the data -- (3) and
(4) are both true, but we have reasons to not assert (3) that do not
apply to (4).

The core idea will be a development of one outlined by Kit Fine
[-@Fine1975a 140] and Rosanna Keefe [-@Keefe2000 164]. Fine and Keefe
are both supervaluationists, but the theory they present *looks like* it
could work independently of the supervaluational framework. Louis's
being bald is not a sufficient condition for you to properly assert he
is bald - rather he must be *determinately* bald. Or, perhaps more
perspicuously, it must be determinately true that he is bald. For Fine
and Keefe, being determinately true means being supertrue, but may mean
something different to you if, perchance, you disavow supervaluationism.
However we understand determinacy, we should agree that a simple
sentence like (1) is assertable only if it is supertrue. Assuming other
factors are equal, the audience is interested in the state of Louis's
hair, you have adequate epistemic access to that state, and so on, (1)'s
being determinately true will also be a sufficient condition for its
proper assertion. We will assume from now on that those conditions are
met. We will write *Determinately S* as $\square S$ throughout in what
follows, noting where necessary what assumptions we are making about its
logic.

Now comes the crucial step. If that was all you were told, you would
think that for a disjunction *A or B* could be properly asserted iff it
were determinately true, just like all other sentences. But, Fine and
Keefe suggest, perhaps we take the condition in which it can be properly
asserted to be different to this. We think (rightly or wrongly) that it
can only be properly asserted if $\square A \vee \square B$ is true, and
not merely if $\square (A \vee B$) is true. The bulk of this paper
consists of a development of this idea, and a defence of that
development.

According to the theory presented thus far, there is a fairly mechanical
procedure for connecting simple sentences with their assertion
conditions. The suggestion, then, is that we work out the assertion
conditions for compound sentences by applying that procedure not to
whole sentences, but to their parts. This is how we get the assertion
condition for '$A$ or $B$' being $\square A \vee \square B$. To which
parts should we apply this procedure? Well, perhaps there are no hard
and fast rules about this. Perhaps context determines whether the
procedure should be applied to a whole sentence or to its sentential
parts. You might expect that this will mean context determines whether
sentences like (3) and (4) can be properly asserted. This is right in
the case of (3). If its assertion condition is (3a) then it can be
asserted, if it is (3b) then it cannot. ((3a) is the case where the
procedure is applied to the whole sentence, (3b) where it is applied to
the parts.)

However, this speculation would be wrong about (4). No matter how or
where we apply the mechanical procedure, the assertion condition for (4)
that is generated is true, as (4a) to (4c) illustrate.

Apply our little procedure to (4) any way you like, and provided you've
started with a broadly classical theory like supervaluationism or
epistemicism, you will predict that (4) can be properly asserted. So the
theory sketched by Fine and Keefe looks like it has a chance of
capturing some rather interesting data.

The two core aims of this paper are to show that Fine and Keefe's
theory, as amended and extended, can (a) explain all the data about our
reactions to compound sentences involving vague clauses like *Louis is
bald* and (b) this theory can be grounded in an independently plausible
theory concerning implicatures of compound sentences. Along the way we
will say a lot about conditionals whose antecedents typically carry
Gricean implicatures -- these will be an important data source.
Reflecting on these conditionals will help explain some odd data
concerning vagueness, but it will also provide an interesting
perspective on some problems concerning conditionals, such as Vann
McGee's apparent counterexamples to *modus ponens*. We will also
consider whether this explanation of (3) and (4) can be adopted by
non-supervaluationists. The answer here will be that theorists who adopt
non-classical logic almost certainly cannot adopt this solution, while
theorists who retain classical logic but provide non-semantic theories
of vagueness (such as, notably, epistemicists) probably cannot adopt the
solution, though the evidence here is more equivocal. First, though, we
shall survey the possible responses to the data about (1) through (4).

## Famous Answers

Faced with such the challenges posed by these responses, theorists of
vagueness seem to have five (or maybe six) options open to them.

### Option One -- Deny the Data {#option-one-deny-the-data .unnumbered}

The simplest thing to do philosophically would be to deny the data;
deny, that is, that there really are a substantial number of speakers
who are willing to assent to (4), but not to (1), (2) or (3). Maybe
after a substantial empirical investigation, this will turn out to be
the right thing to say. But I doubt it is true. A poor reason for this
is introspection.[^1] A better reason is that it seems to be a fairly
widespread assumption among experts in the field that the data is
roughly as I have presented it. Some authors have explicitly asserted
that this is the data (e.g. @Burgess1987 and @Tappenden1993), and others
have implicitly conceded the same thing. Theorists who reject the law of
non-contradiction typically feel they have some explaining to do[^2],
while some of those who accept the law of excluded middle similarly feel
an explanation is needed[^3], and the reason such theorists feel this
way, I imagine, is that they note that we intuitively do assent to (4)
but not (3), so they have to explain their divergence from ordinary
practice. I will from now on assume that speakers do have these
intuitions, though of course this is an empirical assumption, and much
of the argument in what follows would lose some force if there was
serious evidence against this assumption.

### Option Two -- Deny that the Data is Relevant {#option-two-deny-that-the-data-is-relevant .unnumbered}

There is an obvious reason we might think that the data about assent to,
and dissent from, various sentences is relevant to the theorist of
vagueness. Such a theorist is in a position similar in broad respects to
Quine's radical translator [@Quine1960 26-35], though with two salient
differences. First, she is trying to 'translate' her own language[^4].
Secondly, she is *not* taking for granted that the logic and semantics
of the language under investigation are classical. Still, the similarity
is close enough that we should take native dispositions concerning
assent to various sentences in various situations to be important data.
But, it might be objected, we do not take untutored dispositions to be
particularly important here. What really matters to our project are the
*reflective* dispositions of speakers, and, it might be argued, speakers
will not keep the dispositions described above at the end of the process
of coming to reflective equilibrium. This is a more serious option than
the first, and it requires a more subtle response. In a nutshell, the
response I will give is that the theory I develop in this paper not only
predicts but justifies speakers assenting to (4) but not (1), (2) or
(3), and hence these dispositions can be kept in equilibrium. How good a
response this is cannot be assessed without seeing my theory, so I will
say no more about this until the theory is presented.[^5]

### Option Three -- Radical Semantic Change {#option-three-radical-semantic-change .unnumbered}

One could hold that the reason that the only one of the numbered
sentences to which speakers assent is (4) is because (4) is the only one
of them that is true. A sufficient motivation for holding such a view
would be believing that (a) speakers are competent judges of the truth
value of sentences such as (1) through (4) and (b) they assent to such
sentences iff they are true. Whether that is the motivation or not, this
option is taken completely by @Burgess1987, and is adopted in part by
many other theorists. Defenders of 'many-valued' logics[^6] accept that
(1), (2) and (3) are not completely true, though neither are they
completely false. Supervaluationists[^7] accept that (1) and (2) are not
true, and (4) *is* true, though (3) is also true, so there must be some
alternative explanation for why speakers decline to assent to it. As
several writers have pointed out, most notably @Field1986 and
[@McGee1991 Ch. 4], the philosophical justification for such a move is
somewhat dubious. In most fields of study, if there is some clash
between our theories, the data, and classical logic, then what generally
goes is our theory, unless we have good reason to impugn the data. It is
*very* unlikely that the best move will be to dismiss classical logic,
unless there are no other moves available. So the success of this option
depends on the non-viability of other options, and I demonstrate below
that a rival option is viable. (Also there are serious internal
difficulties with taking the data at face value, as Burgess and
Humberstone themselves show.)

### Option Four -- Moderate Semantic Change {#option-four-moderate-semantic-change .unnumbered}

@Russell1923 did not discuss (4), but agreed that (1), (2) and (3) might
all fail to be true. This was not because he had a radically
non-classical logic. Rather, it was because he thought that logic only
applied to logically perfect languages, and natural languages are not
logically perfect because they contain vague terms. While this position
is not vulnerable to exactly the same methodological objection as option
three, it does seem unhappy for two reasons. First, it is a seriously
incomplete theory unless it tells us what kinds of reasoning we are
allowed to use in natural language. Since instances of the law of
excluded middle are not true, any argument that law as a conclusion must
be flawed in some way, but Russell does not provide a systematic way to
locate such errors, and no one developing his theory has done so either.
Secondly, the theory must provide a way to provide truth conditions to
sentences such that (3) is not true, and either (4) is true or we have
an explanation of why speakers are disposed to assent to it even though
it is not true. The first option here seems to lead to the difficulties
that Burgess and Humberstone face, and the second is a theory schema in
need of completion. In neither case does it seem this Russellian option
is preferable to the position I will presently describe.

### Option Five -- Radical Pragmatics {#option-five-radical-pragmatics .unnumbered}

We know for many sentences that whether speakers are disposed to assert
them, or even assent to them, depends on many factors beyond the mere
truth conditions for the sentence. In each of the following cases[^8],
speakers may only assent to the sentence marked (a) if the condition
marked (b) is not satisfied.

In all cases, the condition mentioned in (b) is no part of the truth
condition of the sentence (a)[^9], though it may be required for
ordinary speakers to be willing to assent to that sentence. The
pragmatic interpretation of (1) through (4) is that just as in (5)
through (8), there is some difference between the situations[^10] in
which speakers would willingly assent to the sentences, and the
situations in which they are true. In what follows I will defend this
option. We can, without assuming much at all about what the true theory
of vagueness looks like, develop a pragmatic theory that predicts (and,
for that matter, justifies) speakers assertoric practices concerning
sentences like (1) through (4), and concerning a few more interesting
cases that will be discussed below. While the existence of such a theory
does not *entail* that various theories of vagueness based on
non-classical logic are mistaken, indeed the pragmatic theory I sketch
will, when combined with such theories generate true and interesting
predictions, just as it would when combined with more conservative
theories of vagueness, it does undercut the support for theories based
on non-classical logics at a crucial point.

There is, perhaps, a sixth option available, which is to mix and match
between the above accounts. Just how reputable this option is depends on
just how systematic the mixing and matching is. One might claim that
some of the dispositions under consideration will not be preserved in
equilibrium, others can be explained pragmatically, and others are good
guides to the semantics. If this is done unsystematically, then it is
obviously philosophically dubious. Later in the paper I will suggest
that some recent arguments against various theories of vagueness commit
just this sin. But for now we will focus on the version of option 5
outlined in the introduction.

## Truth, Assertion and Compound Sentences

Consider again sentence (8), which we will focus on for a while.

The truth conditions for this sentence should be clear enough, though
perhaps a little vague at the fringes.[^11] The sentence is true iff
each conjunct is true. That is, (8) is true iff it is true that Katie
had several drinks (in the time pragmatically specified as being under
consideration) and drove home (again in *that* specified time). Assuming
that the context specifies that the time under consideration is last
night, then (8) is true iff Katie had several drinks last night and
Katie drove home last night.

The sentence cannot be properly asserted, and speakers would not
normally be disposed to either assert it or assent to it, unless Katie
drove home shortly after having the said several drinks, and that the
drinks in question were alcoholic. The reason it cannot be properly
asserted unless this condition is satisfied is that hearers will
normally conclude from the existence of the utterance that the
conditions are satisfied, and hence the speaker would mislead the
hearers if they were not. There is one other condition that must be
satisfied before speakers will happily assert (8). They must know (or at
least take themselves to know) that all the conditions mentioned above
are true. So for (8) to be assertable, a certain fact about the world
must be true, Katie must have had several alcoholic drinks and shortly
afterwards drove home, and a certain fact about the speaker must be
true, she must have a justified belief that the fact about the world is
true. In general (though perhaps not always) we will be able to make
such a division into facts about the world that can be reasonably
assumed to be communicated by an utterance and hence must be true before
a sentence can be properly asserted, and facts about the speaker
(usually that they have a justified belief that those facts about the
world hold) that must also be true before that speaker can properly
assert the sentence. No doubt there will be practical difficulties in
any case in making this division, and in some cases there may even be
conceptual difficulties in carrying out this task. (We will come back to
this point below.) Recognising this difficulty, we will for now carry on
as if the division can be made. For a sentence $S$, say the *semantic*
content of $S$ is the set of situations in which $S$ is true, the
*objective pragmatic* content of $S$ is the set of situations such that
the conditions about the world necessary for $S$ to be asserted are
satisfied and the *subjective pragmatic* content of $S$ for $x$ is the
set of situations in which $S$ justifiably believes that objective
pragmatic content of $S$ is satisfied. The idea is that $x$ should be
happy, on reflection, to assent to $S$ in just those situations in the
subjective pragmatic content of $S$. We will write $T(S)$ for the
semantic content of $S$, $O(S)$ for its objective pragmatic content, and
$A(S, x)$ for its subjective pragmatic content for $x$. The semantic
content of the sentence on an occasion is what Grice said was *said* (in
his favoured sense) by uttering the sentence, while the objective
pragmatic content is what he said is *implicated* [@Grice1989 118].[^12]
The subjective pragmatic content corresponds rather closely to Quine's
affirmative stimulus meaning [@Quine1960 33].

It is commonly[^13] assumed that semantic content must be compositional.
This assumption may or may not be true, but there is some evidence that
objective pragmatic content is compositional. (Indeed, this is an
important reason for recognising objective pragmatic content as well as
subjective pragmatic content.) Consider the indicative conditional (9).

It seems that $O$((9)) includes all the situations we might find
ourselves in these days. Given that there are laws against driving while
intoxicated, and that the antecedent implies that Katie drove
intoxicated, we are happy to assent to that conditional. (Perhaps things
would be different if we somehow knew that Katie was immune to motor
laws, but let us set that aside.) But even though intuitively $O$((9))
includes all situations we might hope to find ourselves in, there is a
good *argument* that $T$((9)) does not include some salient situations
in everyday life. Consider the world in which last night Katie drove
home sober, then had several drinks, and broke no laws for the evening.
Then (9) is a conditional with a *true* antecedent and a *false*
consequent. And that indicative conditionals with true antecedents and
false consequents are false is the closest thing there is to a point of
consensus in theories about conditionals[^14]. So $T$((9)) does not
include some situations that *are* included in $O$((9)). Further, we can
work out what $O$((9)) is without knowing what $T$((9)) is; even if
doubt about various semantic theories concerning indicative conditionals
means that we are unsure of the truth conditions for (9), we know that
$O$((9)) includes all the situations we are likely to encounter. This
explains why we can assert (9) while knowing next to nothing about
Katie; given reasonable background assumptions, its objective pragmatic
content is more or less trivial.

These considerations decisively refute one possible theory of how we
calculate objective pragmatic content, a theory that Grice seems to take
to be true.[^15] On this hypothesis, we calculate the objective
pragmatic of a sentence by first consulting our linguistic knowledge to
determine its semantic content, then employing our mastery of the
Gricean maxims to work out what conversational implicatures it might
have, and the objective pragmatic content is the set of situations in
the semantic content where those implicatures are all true. This can't
be right in detail, for it predicts $O$((9)) will be a subset of
$T$((9)), which we have seen is not true. And it can't even be right in
broad outline, because it predicts we should be unsure of the objective
pragmatic content of a sentence until we know its semantic content. This
seems clearly untrue in the case of (9); we can know its objective
pragmatic content while remaining quite unsure of its semantic
content.[^16]

Those considerations suggest that the objective pragmatic content of
compound sentences is tied less closely to the semantic content of that
sentence, and more closely to the objective pragmatic content of its
constituent sentences. In light of this suggestion, the following
hypothesis, called the Compositionality of Objective Pragmatic content,
or COP, thesis, might be plausible.

COP

:   The objective pragmatic content of a compound sentence is a function
    of the objective pragmatic contents of its constituents, with the
    function given by the operator or connective used to form the
    compound.

When stated in full generality like that COP is a bit obscure, but it
becomes clear with a few examples. COP entails that $O$(*If* $A$ *then
B*) is *If O*($A$) *then O*($B$). In the case of (9), this is exactly
the right answer. Further, it entails that $O$(*A or B*) will be
*O*($A$) *or O*($B$) and $O$(*Not A*) will be *Not O*($A$). Again,
consideration of sentences where (8) is embedded in various sentences
suggest that COP is on the right track.

One might worry that this one example can hardly support a theory as
wide ranging as COP. This of course is true; a large part of the
argument for COP is that it generates a theory that makes such
surprising true predictions when applied to vagueness. (See, in
particular, the discussion of complex contradictions in section 4
below.) But it is worth noting that the points about (8) and (9) above
do not just turn on features to do with the ordering implication in
conjunctions. Kent [@Bach1994 134] notes that one can often use (10) to
sooth someone who is in a relatively mild state of disrepair. (Imagine a
mother saying this to an injured child, or a doctor reporting good test
results to a patient.)

Normally, when this is uttered, the speaker knows, or should know, that
it is literally false. Of course the person addressed is going to die
some time, so the semantic content of (10) is false. This reasoning is
not conclusive; the sentence might be elliptical and it might be clearly
true once the ellipsis is completed. But the more plausible position
seems to be that the sentence is false. The speaker communicates that
the hearer is not going to die soon, or from the particular illness they
are suffering, and that is the objective pragmatic content of the
sentence. And we can note that this content seems to be carried over
into conditionals. Jack is working on a major project, and his manager
Jill is concerned he is taking too much time off with illness. While he
is at home with one minor illness, Jill emails him the following
directive.

Heartless, perhaps, but the intended message is clear. If Jack is not
going to die from this particular illness, or at any rate in the near
future, he should be at work. Jack could hardly say that this
conditional directive (threat?) did not apply to him, because as a
mortal he is sure to die. COP is not entailed by two examples any more
than it is by one, but it is worthwhile noting that we have not had to
rely on particular features of (8) or (10) to support COP.

If something like COP is correct, then it is important to distinguish
between objective and subjective pragmatic content.[^17] Note that if we
replaced *objective* with *subjective* pragmatic content in COP,
generating a thesis we may call CSP, we get a clearly false thesis. It
is not the case that we are only happy to assert *A or B* when we are
happy to assert $A$ or we are happy to assert $B$. We may assert *Either
X will be the next Prime Minister or Y will be the next Prime Minister*,
for suitable *X* and *Y*, when we don't know who the next Prime Minister
will be, but are very confident that it will be *X* or *Y*. Indeed, we
might *only* assert it if we don't know who the next Prime Minister will
be; if we did know this we would assert it rather than just the
disjunction. So CSP is false, but this does not show that COP is false.

## Application to Vagueness

On most theories of vagueness, if $F$ is a vague predicate, then we can
distinguish between $a$ being $F$, and $a$ being determinately $F$.[^18]
And, again on most theories, the conditions under which it is proper to
say that $a$ is $F$, or to assent to the claim that $a$ is $F$, are
those where $a$ is determinately $F$. On the epistemic theory of
vagueness, we can only say that $a$ is $F$ if it known that $a$ is $F$,
and, according to that theory, that means that $a$ is determinately $F$.
(What makes the epistemic theory of vagueness epistemic is that it
interprets 'determinately' as an epistemic operator.) On the
supervaluational theory, we can only properly say that $a$ is *F* if $a$
is $F$ on all[^19] precisifications, and that is what it is for $a$ to
be determinately $F$ on that theory. On degree of truth theories, we can
assert that $a$ is $F$ iff $a$ is $F$ to a very high degree, and that is
what it is for $a$ to be determinately $F$ on that theory. In short, the
pragmatic content of '$a$ is $F$' is that $a$ is determinately $F$, or,
for short, $\square Fa$. Note that on the epistemic theory, this is the
*subjective* pragmatic content, while on the supervaluational and degree
of truth theories it is the *objective* pragmatic content. This reflects
the differences between the ways the theories understand determinate
truth. This point acquires some importance soon, so we will return below
to what epistemicists might take the objective pragmatic content of '$a$
is $F$' to be. For now we will focus on those theories where
$\square Fa$ is the objective pragmatic content of '$a$ is $F$'. On
those theories, COP predicts that objective pragmatic content of (3) and
(4) will be (12) and (13)

Note that on almost any theory of vagueness one cares to consider, if
Louis is a penumbral case of baldness, then (12) will be false and (13)
true. (12) is false because Louis's penumbral status makes both
$\square$ (Louis is bald) and $\square$ (Louis is not bald) come out
false. Hence if COP is true, speakers should decline to assent to (3),
but should assent to (4). Since they do, this is good news for COP.

We have not said how COP should apply to quantified sentences. These are
a little harder to incorporate into the theory than sentences that are
formed by familiar propositional connectives because the logical form of
these sentences is less transparent. I will assume[^20] that quantified
noun phrases are restricted quantifiers. Hence the logical form of (14)
will be (15).

Although COP as it stands is silent on quantified sentences, we can
naturally generalise it. And the natural thing to say, given COP, is
that if the logical form of (14) is (15) then its objective pragmatic
content is (16).

This lets us explain one of the consequences of supervaluationism that
is, if anything, more surprising that its endorsement of the law of
excluded middle. The following presentation of the puzzle is due to
Jamie Tappenden. Let $P(n$) abbreviate 'A man with exactly $n$ cents is
poor'. "Since the supervaluation deems the conditional premise of the
sorites paradox false, it deems true the calim that there is an $n$ such
that ($P(n) \wedge \neg P(n+1$)). Alas there is no such number."
[@Tappenden1993 564] Let us abbreviate further, and say that $n$ is the
poor borderline iff it is such that ($P(n) \wedge \neg P(n+1$)). Then
the dubious claim is (17), written symbolically as (18), and Tappenden's
alternative judgement is (19), or in symbols (20).

From what we said above, it follows that the objective pragmatic
contents of (17) and (19) are (18a) and (20a).[^21]

1.  \[$\exists x \square N(x$)\] ($\square PB(x$))

2.  $\square \neg$(\[$\exists x \square N(x$)\] ($\square PB(x$)))

Since (18a) is false, and (20a) true, we have an explanation not only of
why one cannot properly assert (17), but of why one can assert its
negation, (19).

So our hypothesis, derived from COP, can explain a few puzzling pieces
of data. And if COP is generally correct, then it does so it a fairly
systematic way. Tappenden suggests that we endorse (4) but not (3)
because "Noncontradiction in these cases is a "no overlap" condition"
while "excluded middle functions as a "sharp boundaries" condition."
(565) No doubt this is true, but it would be nice to have a systematic
explanation of why this is so, and COP promises to give us one.

We notes above that the *subjective* pragmatic content of compound
sentences is not built from the subjective pragmatic content of its
components in the way that objective pragmatic content is built up. This
means that if the *definitely* operator in the pragmatic content is part
of the subjective pragmatic content, we cannot give the above
explanation for the unattractiveness of (3). This is not a problem for a
supervaluational theory, but it is a problem for the epistemic theory.
When Louis is a penumbral case of baldness, the reason we are happy to
neither assert that he is bald nor assert that he is not is that we do
not know which. There is a close analogy, according to this theory,
between our unwillingness to make these assertions and our unwillingness
to assert either that Louis was born in France or that he was not when
we do not know which.[^22] But it seems there is an important disanalogy
between these two cases; namely, in the case of ignorance we are happy
to say that the relevant instance of excluded middle is true, whereas
our assessment of (3) is, as Tappenden puts it, "range from mixed to
strongly negative" [-@Tappenden1993 565].

There is a way out of this difficulty for the epistemicist, though it
does require relaxing the analogy between cases of vagueness and
traditional cases of ignorance. We said above that the subjective
pragmatic content of a sentence (on an occasion) was that the speaker
knew the objective pragmatic content was satisfied. In effect, we took
objective pragmatic content as primary, and subjective pragmatic content
is derived from it. We could have done things the other way around.
Loosely following Quine's lead, we will take subjective pragmatic
content as primary, and say that the objective pragmatic content is what
is common to subjective pragmatic content all (or perhaps most)
occasions the sentence is used. If part of the subjective pragmatic
content on every occasion of utterance of a simple sentence is that the
speaker knows the sentence is true, then it will follow that part of the
*objective* pragmatic content is that the sentence is *knowable*. So we
can interpret $\square$ in each of the statements of objective pragmatic
content as a *knowability* operator, and we get all the right results:
(10) and (18a) turn out to be false, (11) and (20a) turn out to be true.

If true this account would explain the date, but its plausibility seems
open to question. The theory says that objective pragmatic content of a
simple sentence is what is common to all the different subjective
pragmatic contents, and then says that the objective pragmatic contents
of complex sentences are composed out of the objective pragmatic
contents of the components, and says this fact explains our reactions to
(3) and (4). But that fact (if it is a fact) stands in need of
explanation just as much as our reactions to (3) and (4) do. If
objective pragmatic content is something as artificial as this, it seems
mysterious why it should so neatly compose. If, on the other hand,
objective pragmatic content is something that speakers understand in
virtue of understanding the sentence (and perhaps even something they
understand before understanding the semantic content), then we have an
explanation for why it is compositional: it has to be if speakers'
understanding of the language is to be productive. So while
epistemicists *can* adopt something like COP as an explanation for our
reactions to (3) and (4), their adopting of it must rest on premises
that seem surprising, and possibly in need of explanation.

## Modifying COP

If our only data was that people are hesitant about instances of the law
of excluded middle, like (3), but are not resistant to asserting simple
instances of the law of non-contradiction, like (4), then COP would do
an excellent job in explaining the data that we have. But this does not
seem to be all the data we have. In two ways our willingness to assert
sentences goes beyond what is suggested above. In this section I will
set out that data, and then suggest a natural revision of COP that
explains this data, as well as the data presented above.

Above we have stressed what Jamie Tappenden calls the truth-functional
intuition. This intuition, directly or indirectly, causes us to resist
disjunctions when we know that for each disjunct there is no fact of the
matter as to whether it is true. As Tappenden notes, though, our
intuitions towards vague sentences are also guided at times by a
penumbral intuition. When under the sway of this intuition, we tend to
judge disjunctions as true if all the possibilities other than the
disjuncts in question have been ruled out. To take a classic example
from @Fine1975a, if a shade of colour is around the border between red
and orange, then in the right frame of mind we might be prepared to say
*That is red or orange*. To be sure, as @Tye1990 and @Tappenden1993
note, this intuition can waver in the face of sustained argument, such
as the forceful suggestion that if a disjunction is true there should be
a fact about which disjunct is true. And as @Machina1976 makes clear,
some philosophers do not feel this intuition at all.

I think the penumbral intuition is a real, widespread phenomena, and it
is incumbent on a theory of vagueness to explain it. My main reason for
regarding it this way, despite the comments of Tye, Tappenden and
Machina, is the prevalence of the penumbral intuition in some of the
social sciences. To take just one prominent case, in most macroeconomics
textbooks there will be a warning that the traditional division of goods
into investment goods and consumption goods is fraught with vagueness,
cars are often mentioned as being a penumbral case, but this is
explicitly taken to be consistent with the assumption that all goods are
investment goods or consumption goods. For example, [@Keynes1936 59-63]
explicitly mentions that the line between investment goods and
consumption goods is vague, but then proceeds to run a technical
argument that clearly has as a premise that all goods are investment
goods or consumption goods[^23]. And the common distinction between
goods and services is attended by similar vagueness, I guess takeaway
food is these days the clearest penumbral case, but economists are
frequently willing to divide all sales into purchases of goods and
purchases of services, simply because that exhausts the possibilities.

The epistemic merits of building a scientific discipline on vague terms
while assuming the logic appropriate to that discipline is classical
could be debated, but that is not our topic. The fact remains that
various social scientists are prepared to *talk* in a certain way,
accepting disjunctions even when they know they could not, in principle,
have reason to accept either disjunct. This is an important piece of
data that theorists of vagueness must explain. The data is not of a
different kind to what had been previously considered, but it does
reinforce the claim that the penumbral intuition must be accommodated.

I said above that we are normally prepared to accept simple instances of
the law of non-contradiction, like (4). A corollary of that is that
speakers normally *reject* simple contradictions, even when each
conjunct is a penumbral case. (21) is an obvious example.

[@Williamson1994-WILV 136] notes that intuitions can be a little
misleading here, because of the use of (more or less) idiomatic
expressions like 'He is and he isn't' to describe borderline cases. To
get a feel for this, imagine the following conversation. "Is Louis
bald?" "Well, ... he is and he isn't." One might push intuitions like
this to get someone to feel (21) is properly assertable, and hence (4)
is not. As Williamson perceptively notes, this tendency can be overcome
merely by using different names, or generally different referring
devices, to pick out the subject in each conjunct. This is fairly good
evidence that we are dealing with an idiomatic usage here. So whatever
one thinks about (21), (22) should seem definitely odd.

To the extent that one can make sense of (22) at all, it is by assuming
that *bald* picks out an intensional property, while the identity clause
only implies an extensional equivalence between Louis and the king. This
is almost certainly a false assumption, but it seems the most charitable
assumption around if one is interpreting (22). One certainly does not
hear utterances of (22) as in any way conveying that Louis is a
borderline case of baldness, as one might hear the idiomatic, "He is and
he isn't."

Everything that has been said so far relates to what I have called
simple contradictions. These are sentences such as '$a$~1~ is $F$ and
$a$~2~ is not $F$', for suitable predicates $F$, and expressions $a$~1~
and $a$~2~ which are known by all parties to the conversation to
co-refer. This last condition can be satisfied on a particular occasions
by making the two names the same, or by saying that they are
co-referring, as in (22). And, following Williamson, I have argued that
the only such sentences that are accepted by speakers are idiomatic.
However, when we stop dealing with simple contradictions, we find the
data becomes somewhat more problematic. I think (23) is a legitimate, if
slightly long-winded, way to communicate that Louis is a penumbral case
of baldness.

Assuming the last *not* in (23) can be viewed as a sentential
connective, then (23) is a contradiction.[^24] Yet it seems like a
perfectly accurate thing to say about Louis. Any infelicity associated
with it is due to its length, not its apparent falsehood. Unlike (21),
or phrases like "He is and he isn't", (23) does not behave like an
idiom. Replace the pronoun with a term known to refer to Louis, such as
"His Majesty", and the message conveyed by (23) stays the same.

1.  It is not the case that Louis is bald, but nor is it the case that
    His Majesty is not bald.

So some contradictions, such as (23) can be properly asserted on account
of vagueness, and this is not due to their being idiomatic. In the
terminology of the previous section, the objective pragmatic content of
(23) is not the null set, it is the set of situations where Louis is a
penumbral case of baldness. This striking piece of data needs to be
explained. And it should be immediately clear that the explanation
cannot be that (23) is true. After all, (23) is a contradiction, and
contradictions have a tendency to be false. So the explanation for it
must be pragmatic. As it stands, COP cannot provide that explanation.
But a small alteration to COP can do so, and when combined with the
right kind of theory of vagueness, can explain why we are happy to
accept disjunctions without a determinately true disjunct, at least
while in the social science classroom. I will first state the theory,
called POP (loosely for Pragmatic determination of Objective Pragmatic
Content), then explain how it applies. I will first state the special
case of POP for sentences that have no differences between their
semantic and objective pragmatic contents other than those caused by
vagueness. This special theory will be called POP~V~.

POP~V~

:   Let $S$ be a sentence that has no differences between its semantic
    and objective pragmatic contents other than those caused by
    vagueness. Then there is a sentence $S^\prime$ generated by adding
    $\square$ operators to $S$ so that every term in it apart from
    sentential connectives is inside the scope of a $\square$ operator,
    and $O(S)$ = $T(S^\prime$). Which such sentence $S^\prime$ satisfies
    this condition on an occasion where $S$ is used is determined by
    pragmatic features of utterance and occasion.

So, for example, if $S$ is '$a$ is $F$ or *b* is *G*', then POP~V~ says
that the objective pragmatic content of $S$ is either
$\square Fa \vee \square$ *Gb* or $\square$ (*Fa* $\vee$ *Gb*). More
generally, any sentence you can generate from $S$ by adding boxes so
that every part of $S$, except the sentential connectives, is inside the
scope of a box, could be the objective pragmatic content of $S$. Letting
*l* be a name for Louis, and $B$ refer to the property of baldness, then
POP~V~ says that the objective pragmatic content of (3) is (24a) or
(24b), and that the objective pragmatic content of (4) is one of (25a)
through (25c).

In each case, it says there should be some indeterminacy in precisely
how the objective pragmatic content is generated. But, as we said in the
introduction, a crucial difference arises between the two cases if we
assume a broadly supervaluational (or epistemic) interpretation of
$\square$. In (3), POP~V~ predicts that depending on the context, the
objective pragmatic content will either be (24a), which is false, or
(24b), which is true. So it predicts that whether (3) is assertable will
depend on the broader features of the context that select which of these
will be the objective pragmatic content. In (4), POP~V~ predicts that
whatever method is pragmatically selected to generate the objective
pragmatic content, it will be true. So (4) should be always assertable.
In each case, we seem to get a rather pleasing correlation between
predictions and data.

The assumption here that $\square$ would get a supervaluational (or
epistemic) interpretation is crucial. Interpret $\square A$ as meaning
$A$ has a high truth value, in a typical degree of truth theory, and we
do not get the conclusion that (3) should sound trivial in some
contexts, since (24b) is not guaranteed to be true, and nor do we get
the conclusion that (4) should always sound trivial, since (25c) is no
longer guaranteed to be true. In fact, if Louis is anything like a
penumbral case of baldness, (25c) is guaranteed to be false on those
theories. So if proponents of that theory want to explain why (4) sounds
trivial, they must appeal to something other than POP~V~.
Supervaluationists, however, can explain the data just via POP~V~. So
can epistemicists, provided they can discharge the burden outlined
earlier of explaining how a subjective feature like knowability can make
its way into objective pragmatic content. From now on we will assume,
with the supervaluationists and epistemicists, that all classical
tautologies are true, and all classical anti-tautologies are false.

Most surprisingly, POP~V~ is consistent with the hypothesis that complex
contradictions, like (23) should be properly assertable, and hence have
a non-degenerate objective pragmatic content. POP~V~ predicts that the
objective pragmatic content of (23) is one of (26a) through (26d).

(26b) through (26d) are all false, since they are all inconsistent, or
entail inconsistencies by obvious steps. But (26a) is not inconsistent,
indeed it is true. So POP~V~ explains why a contradiction, like (23) can
be used to convey a true message, despite not being idiomatic. This is a
rather surprising piece of data to have, and it is even more surprising
to have a neat explanation of it. For what it is worth, and depending on
your preferred philosophy of science it might be worth a lot, when I was
developing this theory, the explanation of (23) appeared as a
prediction, not a retrodiction. I had no idea that there could be
non-idiomatic contradictions which, because of vagueness, could be used
to convey true messages, until I realised POP~V~ predicted the existence
of such sentences, and then I realised (23) was such a sentence. If one
tends to value surprising and true *predictions* higher than any
retrodictions, this little bit of autobiography has epistemic
importance[^25].

So POP~V~ can explain some data that COP cannot. Still, we have
insufficient reason to switch to POP~V~ unless it can be embedded in a
theory of the same level of generality as COP. To that end, I set out
the general version of POP. For any compound sentence, there are going
to be several ways to partition the sentence into sub-sentences that one
can 'treat as simple'. To treat a sub-sentence as simple, in the sense
intended here, is to not take into account the fact that the sentence
has sentences as parts when evaluating its objective pragmatic content.
For a sentence that one treats as simple, the objective pragmatic
content is generated from the form and semantic content by the
application of broadly Gricean maxims, including, if this is not
included already, a maxim that one should not assert sentences unless
they are *determinately* true. Sentences that have no sentences as
proper parts in their logical form have to be treated as simple.[^26]
For other sentences, though, there are often choices as to which
sentences can be treated as simple for purposes of generating objective
pragmatic content. For example, if $S$ is '*If S*~1~ *and S*~2~ *then
S*~3~', then one can treat $S$~1~, $S$~2~ and $S$~3~ as simple
sentences, or '$S$~1~ *and S*~2~' and $S$~3~, or, possibly, $S$ itself.
(The 'possibly' here is because it is unclear whether we can treat a
conditional as simple, just because we can only treat as simple
sentences that we (at least tacitly) know the truth conditions of, and
we are so in the dark about how conditionals work that it is not clear
this is possible.) Then POP says:

POP

:   The objective pragmatic content of a compound sentence is a function
    of the objective pragmatic contents of its sub-sentences that are
    treated as simple, with the function given by the operator or
    connective used to form the compound. The choice of which
    sub-sentences are treated as simple is determined by the syntactic
    features of the sentence and the context. The objective pragmatic
    content of sentences treated as simple is determined by a direct
    application of broadly Gricean rules.

The reference here to syntactic features is because there seem to be
some quite general relations between surface-level syntax and which
sentences are treated as simple in the default evaluation of a sentence.
In general, the more variables that are relevant to the objective
pragmatic content of two sentences and not determined by the surface
syntax, the less likely those sentences are to be treated as simple.
Conversely, the fewer 'hidden variables' shared by two sentences, the
more likely they are to be treated as simple. We can see this
illustrated by an example we have already examined. For ease of
exposition, we will use a slight variant on the example discussed above.

In a normal utterance of (27), we evaluate each clause as being about a
specific time. For example, even if there was a time ten years ago when
Katie had several alcoholic drinks and drove home shortly afterwards, we
would not normally consider the antecedent of the conditional satisfied
unless she repeated this behaviour more recently. (There is an obvious
exception to this if the events of ten years ago are for some reason
under consideration.) The sense of 'satisfaction' here is meant to be
rather pragmatic; it is the sense in which the antecedent of (27) is not
satisfied if Katie drank water all night after driving home sober. So in
the pragmatic content of the antecedent of (27) there is a suppressed
reference to a time period. We can make this explicit, as in (28),
without noticeably changing the pragmatic content.

In (28) we added the suppressed time reference to the conjunction that
is its antecedent. This addition did not, it seems, change the pragmatic
content. If, however, we add the suppressed time reference to both
conjuncts, we do get a change in pragmatic content.

To my ear, at least, (29) does not seem as trivial as (28), and
certainly not as trivial as (27) or (9). POP has an explanation for
this. Once the two conjuncts in effect stop sharing an unuttered
constituent, there is less temptation to treat the conjunction as a
simple sentence. If we treat the two conjuncts as simple, then the
objective pragmatic content of the conjunction is just the conjunction
of the objective pragmatic content of the conjuncts. And that means that
the objective pragmatic content does not imply that the driving happened
after the drinking, since this is not implied by the objective pragmatic
content of the conjuncts, taken separately or together.

This hypothesis about which sentences are treated as simple has
implications for vagueness. It predicts that the objective pragmatic
content of (23) will be (23a), and hence that (23) is not just possibly
assertable, but actually assertable. Returning to Fine's example of the
colour patch that is somewhere between being perfectly red and perfectly
orange, it predicts that (30) should sound better than (31).

I think this prediction is correct, though my intuitions here are
perhaps getting unreliable.

The more important point is that there seems to be some evidence for POP
outside of vagueness. Since POP also does an excellent job at explaining
several puzzling features concerning vagueness, this suggests it is a
rather well-supported theory.

## Consequences for Vagueness (and Conditionals)

To conclude, I will mention four points that follow from the discussion
so far. First, I will note that everyone needs a theory something like
POP if they are to explain the data, so the fact that supervaluationists
(and their fellow travellers) need POP to explain some data is no cost
to them. Secondly, I will note that the plausibility of POP reduces the
plausibility of some arguments against various theories of vagueness.
Thirdly, I will outline what POP tells us about Sorites arguments. And
fourthly, I will return to the point of whether epistemicists can appeal
to POP to explain the data under consideration here. I will suggest that
when we look closely at Vann McGee's 'counterexample to modus ponens' we
find some evidence to suggest that they can. The evidence is hardly
conclusive, and POP still sits more comfortably with semantic than with
epistemic theories of vagueness, but it may provide some solace to
epistemicists.

### The Need to POP

POP explains all the data we have, and makes surprising true
predictions. But there might be other theories more deserving of our
assent. In particular, it might be possible to provide a semantic
explanation of the data we have seen so far, and if so, it *might* be
preferable to accept such an explanation. It is not entirely clear
whether such a semantic explanation of the data *would* be preferable if
it were possible, because it has become fairly standard practice to
prefer pragmatic explanations of data to semantic explanations. Grice,
for instance, never conclusively proved that the semantic theories of
Austin, Strawson and Wittgenstein that he attacked in the first of the
William James lectures were false, just that they were unnecessary given
his pragmatic theories. And most of us took that to be sufficient to
make the case, presumably because there is a preference for pragmatic
explanations in the kind of cases Grice considered. I will not stress
this point here, because it seems all the semantic rivals to POP are
provably inferior. I will only consider two rivals, because it shall
quickly become clear that all such rivals face a fairly pressing
problem.

The first rival theory to consider says that vagueness shows that the
correct logic for natural language is intuitionist. Given that the
original task we set ourselves was to explain why an instance of the law
of excluded middle, (3), was not acceptable, while the matching instance
of the law of non-contradiction, (4), was acceptable, intuitionism may
seem to be a natural refuge. After all, intuitionism famously rejects
excluded middle while accepting non-contradiction. It might be objected
immediately that vagueness gives us no reason to drop the principle of
double negation elimination. But it is not clear that this is so. After
all, it is possible to read (23) as a denial of the conditional *If it
is not the case that Louis is not bald, then he is bald*, and as we
argued above, it is possible to read (23) in such a way that it is
acceptable.

The main problem facing intuitionists is that there seem to be
acceptable vague sentences that are intuitionistically unacceptable. One
simple example is (23). Even though intuitionists reject double negation
elimination, and excluded middle, it is inconsistent to *deny* instances
of either principle. But, as noted, it seems that (23) might be a denial
of one or other of these principles. More tellingly, if we are to let
surface structure be our guide as to semantic content, then we will say
that (23) is a contradiction. And since all contradictions are false in
intuitionist logic, intuitionists will counsel its rejection. Of course,
we need not (and perhaps should not) say that surface structure shall be
our infallible guide. So we might say that (23) is intuitionistically
acceptable because it expresses something other than a contradiction, or
that it is acceptable despite being a contradiction because there are
pragmatic rules stating when false sentences are acceptable. Some such
approach is clearly possible: if the intuitionist just buys POP then she
can explain the data just as well as anyone else. But now intuitionism
has ceased to be a rival to POP. Intuitionism plus POP makes for an
intriguing theory of vagueness, but not one we need consider if we want
to know whether POP is in the *best* explanation of the data.

The other semantic theory to consider was explicitly designed to handle
the fact that speakers accept sentences like (4) but not (3).
@Burgess1987 suggest a semantics for vague sentences that draws partly
on the supervaluational semantics suggested by @Fine1975a, and partly on
the tradition established by the degree theorists. A *model*, in their
theory is a set of points, a reflexive, transitive, anti-symmetric
relation on those points $\geq$, and a valuation function that, within
certain constraints, assigns to each atomic proposition two exclusive
(but not necessarily exhaustive) sets of points. Intuitively, the two
sets are the extension and the anti-extension of the atomic proposition.
So an atomic proposition $p$ is true at a point $x$ iff $x$ is in the
extension of $p$, false at $x$ iff $x$ is in the anti-extension of $x$,
and undefined otherwise. Say that a point $x$ is complete iff for any
atomic proposition *q*, $x$ is in the extension or anti-extension of
*q*. There are two constraints on the valuation function.

Persistence

:   For all points $x$, $y$ and atomic propositions $p$, if $y \geq x$
    then if $x$ is in the extension of $p$ then so is $y$ and if $x$ is
    in the anti-extension of $p$, so is $y$.

Two-Sided Resolution

:   For all points $x$ and atomic propositions $p$, if $p$ is undefined
    at $x$ then there are points $y$, *z* such that $y$, *z* \> $x$ and
    $p$ is true at $y$ and false at *z*.

So far this is all familiar from Fine's work. And the truth conditions
for negation and conjunction should also seem familiar.

> $\neg A$ is true at $x$ iff $A$ is false at $x$.
>
> $\neg A$ is false at $x$ iff $A$ is true at $x$.
>
> $A \wedge B$ is true at $x$ iff $A$ is true at $x$ and $B$ is true at
> $x$.
>
> $A \wedge B$ is false at $x$ iff
> ($\forall y \geq x$)($\exists$*z* $\geq y$)($A$ is false at *z* or $B$
> is false at *z*).

The difference appears in how Burgess and Humberstone (hereafter, BH)
handle of disjunction. They offer the following rules:

> $A \vee B$ is true at $x$ iff $A$ is true at $x$ or $B$ is true at
> $x$.
>
> $A \vee B$ is false at $x$ iff $A$ is false at $x$ and $B$ is false at
> $x$.

As BH note, the truth conditions for disjunctions are more like those
offered by degree theorists than those offered by supervaluationists
like Fine. Assuming that English corresponds to a point that is in
neither the extension nor the anti-extension of *Louis is bald*, then we
get the nice result that (4) is true, while (3) is neither true nor
false. Thus BH propose their theory as a way of solving the puzzle posed
by (3) and (4).

BH's theory has many interesting aspects, and the rough sketch I have
given here glosses over some important subtleties in their presentation.
There are, however, three important objections to using their theory as
a solution to the puzzle posed by (3) and (4). (And since these
objections are not removed by a more careful formulation of their
theory, the rough sketch I have made here should suffice.) The first
objection, which BH note, is that the logic contains some failures of
congruentiality. The second is that it seems hard to explain on their
theory why sentences like (3) are sometimes assertable. The last reason
is that they cannot explain the apparent acceptability of (23).

Let $A$ and $B$ be any formulae such that $A \vdash B$ and $B \vdash A$
are provable in a given logic. Let *D* be a formula that has $B$ as a
subformula, and let *C* be a formula which can be generated by replacing
some occurrences of $B$ with $A$. The logic is congruential iff,
whenever *C* and *D* are chosen in this way, *C* $\vdash$ *D* is
provable. In BH's logic, a sequent is valid iff it is truth-preserving
at all points in all models, and BH provide natural deduction rules that
are sound and complete with respect to this definition of validity, so
we can safely call valid sequents provable. Most many-valued logics will
have failures of congruentiality. The provability of $A \vdash B$ and
$B \vdash A$ just shows that these two formulae are true in the same
circumstances. This need not imply that the formulae are *false* in the
same circumstances, so, for example, $\neg A \vdash \neg B$ might not be
valid. So, as BH note, the fact that there are failures of
congruentiality in their system should come as no surprise. One such
failure is that we can prove
$p \wedge \neg p \dashv \vdash \neg(p \vee \neg p$), since neither
formula is ever true. However, we cannot prove
$\neg(p \wedge \neg p) \vdash \neg \neg(p \vee \neg p$), since the LHS
is a logical truth, but the RHS is equivalent to LEM. That there are
some failures of congruentiality like this in a system that allows for
truth-value gaps is not surprising. What is surprising is just how
widespread these failures are. Note that $A \wedge A$ is false at *x*
unless there is some point $y (y \geq x$) where $A$ is true. This means
that it is possible for $A \wedge A$ to be false when $A$ is undefined.
When $A$ is the formula $\neg(p \vee \neg p$), and $p$ is undefined,
then $A$ will be undefined, but $A \wedge A$ will be false. Conversely,
$\neg(A \wedge A$) will be true, even though $\neg A$ is undefined, so
$\neg(A \wedge A) \vdash \neg A$ will not be valid. Since we have, in
general, $A \dashv \vdash A \wedge A$ this is another failure of
congruentiality. As BH notes, this particular failure of congruentiality
does look like a cost of the system.

We noted above that there are occasions, in particular when we are
trying to apply formal methods in social sciences, when it seems
worthwhile to abstract away from vagueness. In these cases, it seems
appropriate to adopt conventions that make sentences like (3)
assertable. There are differences of opinion on this question, but it
seems like the adoption of such conventions has been a benefit to the
development of the social sciences in the last hundred or so years. It
is hard to see how this could be justified if BH have provided the
correct semantics for vague languages. These conventions apparently
license assertions that are simply not true. So I take it to be a cost
of BH's theory that it cannot explain why we accept sentences like (3)
in formal contexts.

Finally, BH's theory is completely unable to explain why we are prepared
to accept sentences like (23). That sentence has the form
$\neg A \wedge \neg \neg A$, and sentences of that form are always false
on BH's theory. Moreover, just the kind of intuitions that would lead us
to accept (4) but reject (3), that is, just the intuitions that BH's
theory rests upon, lead to acceptance of (23). So it looks like BH's
theory has not provided a systematic theory of all the intuitions it
attempts to systematise. It is undoubtedly important to explain our
intuitions concerning (3) and (4), and BH's theory is the best
systematic attempt to do this in the literature. But, given these three
difficulties it faces, the explanation of those intuitions in terms of
POP seems more promising.

### POP and other arguments

The attraction of using many-valued logics in a theory of vagueness is
that they provide an easy explanation of the unacceptability of (3). The
big problem with such theories is that they provide no obvious
explanation of the acceptability of (4). This, I think, is the
motivation underlying Williamson's argument in the following passage.

> The sentences *He is awake* and *He is asleep* are vague. According to
> the degree theorist, as the former falls in degree of truth, the
> latter rises. At some point they have the same degree of truth, an
> intermediate one ... the conjunction *He is awake and he is asleep*
> also has that intermediate degree of truth. But how can that be?
> Waking and sleep by definition exclude each other. *He is awake and he
> is asleep* has no chance at all of being true...Since the conjunction
> in question is clearly incorrect it should not have an intermediate
> degree of truth...How can an explicit contradiction be true to any
> degree other than 0? [-@Williamson1994-WILV 136]

It is, I suppose, noteworthy that Williamson did not make the following
argument:

> At some point the disjunction *He is awake or he is asleep* also has
> that intermediate degree of truth. But how can that be? Waking and
> sleep by definition exhaust the possibilities. *He is awake or he is
> asleep* has no chance at all of being false...Since the disjunction in
> question is clearly correct it should not have an intermediate degree
> of truth...How can an explicit instance of the law of excluded middle
> be true to any degree other than 1?

This alternative argument has, it seems, no persuasive force whatsoever.
So whatever difficulty is being brought out by Williamson's argument
must turn on the differences between his argument and the alternative
argument. Hence the argument cannot just be, for example, that only
sentences that are (completely) true in some possible situations and
(completely) false in others can have intermediate truth values. If that
principle were right, our alternative argument here would also go
through. Nor can Williamson's argument just be that we intuit that
contradictions have degree of truth zero, so contradictions have degree
of truth zero. As epistemicists must accept, some sentences that
intuitively have degree of truth less than one really do have degree of
truth one. (Instances of the law of excluded middle seem to be good
candidates.) For a similar reason, the argument cannot just be that we
intuit that instances of the law of non-contradiction are true. Once we
have accepted that theories can force us to revise intuitions about
which sentences are true, we are in no position to insist that a
particular theory must respect a particular intuition about the truth of
various sentences.

The best form of Williamson's argument, I think, appeals to
assertability. The argument cannot just be that *He is awake and he is
asleep* are not assertable. Degree theorists agree that sentence is not
assertable. Remember that their criteria of assertability is that a
sentence is assertable iff it has a *high* degree of truth. Since *He is
awake and he is asleep* has at most degree of truth 0.5, and 0.5 is not
high, that sentence is definitely not assertable. If, however, we look
at the negation of that sentence we do get an interesting disagreement.
Intuitively, *It is not the case that he is awake and he is asleep* can
be asserted, even though its degree of truth is merely 0.5. This, I
think, is the strongest interpretation of Williamson's argument. What is
wrong with *He is awake and he is asleep*, the reason it seems wrong to
give it even a moderate degree of truth, is that its negation can be
confidently asserted. If the degree-theorist cannot explain *this*, then
her theory is in tatters. It is no good to say here that intuitions
about assertability are not philosophically important; the whole
motivation for the many-valued account is that it captures certain
important intuitions about simple cases, in particular about instances
of the law of excluded middle. So this is a serious challenge. But, as
we have seen, it is a challenge that the degree-theorist can meet if she
accepts POP. With POP, we can explain how it is that *It is not the
case* *that he is awake and he is asleep* can be assertable even though
it does not have a high degree of truth, because its pragmatic content
is *true*.

Of course, similar arguments against epistemicism and supervaluationism,
arguments that turn on the fact that sentences like (3) cannot be
asserted, will also fail if epistemicists and supervaluationists can
explain the unassertability of (3) using POP. Much of the motivation for
degree theories, tracing back to early work by Goguen (1969) and Zadeh
(1975), centred around the fact that we will not assert any of the
sentences: *Louis is bald*; *Louis is not bald*; *Louis is bald or not
bald*.[^27] It might be argued that if (3) were true then competent
speakers would not be hesitant to assert it, and certainly would not
deny it. Hence theories that suggest it is true, such as epistemicism
and supervaluationism, are mistaken. This reasoning is not without merit
(it seems, for example, to be part of the motivation for BH's theory).
However, at best it poses a challenge to explain why it might not be
assertable, and since POP provides that explanation, the challenge is
met.

### Sorites

A good explanation of the Sorites should not just explain why Sorites
arguments are unsound (as they surely are), they should explain why they
seem sound. POP splits this task into three parts, and quickly disposes
of two of them. (We will have to leave the fourth until the next
section.) For simplicity, we will again use Tappenden's notation of
writing $P(n$) for 'A person with exactly $n$ cents is poor'.[^28] Now
consider the following three Sorites arguments.

The arguments are, I claim, arranged in decreasing order of intuitive
plausibility of the premises. It feels absurd to deny, or even to
decline to assent to, any of the premises in (32). One might resist some
of the premises in (33), and in borderline cases the premises in (34)
have very little persuasive force.[^29] Two conclusions immediately
follow. We do not need to explain the intuitive force of (34), since it
has no intuitive force. And our explanation of the intuitive force of
(32) and (33) should not work equally well as an 'explanation' of the
intuitive force of (34). This last condition is something of a worry for
a few theories of vagueness, since without POP it is hard to see how,
say, an epistemicist or a many-valued theorist could account for the
difference between (32) and (34), their premises being trivially
equivalent within their respective theories.[^30] POP is rather helpful
here. According to POP, the objective semantic content of every premise
in (32) is satisfied, but the objective pragmatic content of the
premises in (34) concerning borderline cases are not satisfied. The
problematic case is (33). Since, as I've said a few times, we don't
really understand conditionals all that well, it is not easy to say much
in detail about the objective pragmatic content of the premises in (33).
The best we can say, and it isn't totally compelling, is that speakers
accept the premises in (33) because they accept the premises in (32) and
think (perhaps mistakenly) that they entail the premises in (32). For a
quick introspective test of this, think of how you would react to
someone who said they didn't see any reason to accept the premises in
(33). Would you respond by pointing out to them that there can hardly be
an $n$ such that $P(n$) but not $P(n+1$), so if $P(n$) then $P(n+1$)? If
so, then you too think the main evidence for the premises in (33) is the
premises in (32). This might be the correct explanation, but perhaps
there is something else to say. To say it we need, however, to take one
final detour through conditionals.

## Modus Ponens, Epistemicism and Some Conclusions

Consider again this example, one of Vann McGee's counterexamples to
modus ponens. [@McGee1985 463; the numbering is not in the original]

> I see what looks like a large fish writhing in a fisherman's net a
> ways off. I believe
>
> That, after all, is what one means by "lungfish". Yet, even though I
> believe the antecedent of this conditional, I do not conclude
>
> Lungfishes are rare, oddly shaped, and, to my knowledge, appear only
> in fresh water. It is more likely that, even though it does not look
> like one, the animal in the net is a porpoise.

What exactly should one make of this? We should all agree that (35) does
in some sense follow from the meanings of the words it contains. I think
that the sense is that its objective pragmatic content is satisfied, not
that it is, say, true. After all, its antecedent is, we may suppose,
true and its consequent apparently false, and I am somewhat more certain
than conditionals with true antecedents and false consequents are false
than that any semantic judgement I (or anyone else) would make about
such a case is correct. But this flat-footed defence of the falsity of
(35) does not explain its pragmatic acceptability. Presumably it is
acceptable because the consequent follows, in some pragmatically salient
sense, from the antecedent. But what is that sense?

One might be tempted to appeal to exportation here, but that is just a
red herring. It is one thing to note that speakers typically assent to
*If A and B, then C* just when they assent to *If A, then if B then C*.
It is another thing altogether to explain why these patterns of assent
sway together. If one knew that, one would know why (35) seems
acceptable. If one does not, then one does not know why (35) is
acceptable. So we must look deeper.

If POP is correct, then the explanation for the acceptability of (35),
like that of (9), is that the objective pragmatic content of the
consequent follows from the objective pragmatic content of the
antecedent. So if we get clear on what the objective pragmatic content
of *That is a fish*, we will might solve the puzzle, and learned
something rather interesting about the pragmatic content of simple
sentences.

One possibility can be quickly disposed of, that the objective pragmatic
content of *That is a fish* is just that that is, indeed, a fish. If
that were true we would expect the objective pragmatic content of (36)
to follow from the fishiness of the object. As we have seen, it seems as
if it does not. Even if (36) is true, and that might be the right thing
to say about the example, we cannot assert it, and this does not *seem*
to be merely because of ignorance.

Another possibility might be that the objective pragmatic content of
*That is a fish* is that it is a metaphysically rigid fact that it is a
fish. By 'metaphysically rigid' here I do not mean that it is true in
all metaphysically possible worlds, just that it is true in all
metaphysically nearby worlds. This *might* solve the problem. If there
is some metaphysical stability to the fishiness of the object, then we
might think that if *it* has lungs then *it* is indeed a lungfish,
because *it* could not fail to be a fish, in a suitably strong sense of
could. Whatever the merits of that suggestion, it seems implausible when
applied to sentences outside conditionals. I can properly say *The Cubs
were unlucky last century* without suggesting that their luck is
anything other than a coincidence, so the pragmatic content of that
sentence cannot be that there is anything metaphysically stable about
its truth.

If metaphysical stability does not do the trick here, does epistemic
stability do any better? Not if we mean by 'epistemic stability' that
the speaker knows the sentence to be true. We noted above that assuming
the objective pragmatic content of $S$ is *The speaker knows that S*
causes some difficulties for handling ddisjunctions. Perhaps, though, it
might be suggested that the type of pragmatic content that gets embedded
in conditionals is different to the type of content that gets embedded
in disjunctions. This is ad hoc, but not altogether implausible. Still,
it does not handle all the data about conditionals. As Richmond Thomason
noted[^31], we can properly say sentences like *If the President is a
spy, then we are all being successfully deceived*, where the consequent
most assuredly does not follow from our *knowing* the antecedent.

Maybe a more subtle form of epistemic stability will work. Say that the
objective pragmatic content of (a simple sentence) $S$ is *It is humanly
possible to know that S*. And assume that the right analysis of
indicative conditionals is, broadly speaking, epistemic.[^32] So,
roughly, *If A then B* is true if the epistemically nearest worlds where
$A$ is true are worlds where $B$ is true. Now we have an explanation for
why (35) seems acceptable. If it is knowable that the thing is a fish,
and this has just been made salient, then we might suppose that the
epistemically nearest worlds are all ones where it is a fish.[^33]
Whether this is a plausible story at the end of the day will depend on
how it links up with other facts about the behaviour of indicative
conditionals. But for now we should just note that there is *some*
chance that this explanation will go through. And, given the failures of
other explanations to account for the plausibility of (35), this
provides at least *some* evidence that part of the objective pragmatic
content of $S$ is that it is knowable that $S$. And that, in turn,
provides some evidence that epistemicists about vagueness might be able
to appeal to POP to explain why (4) is acceptable but (3) is not.

Given this, we *may* have one other explanation of the reason we are
inclined to accept the premises in a Sorites argument where the main
premises are conditionals, as in (33). If the objective pragmatic
content of the antecedent is that the antecedent is knowable, then that
certainly entails the truth of the consequent. So might that explain the
acceptability of the conditional? This is possible, but it seems like an
inferior explanation to the one provided at the end of 5.3. The problem
is that one would expect that the sentence would be acceptable if the
objective pragmatic content of the antecedent implied the objective
pragmatic content of the consequent, which it does not. And, of course,
which it could not, unless somehow that objective pragmatic content was
somehow immune to Sorites arguments. Which, obviously, it is not. So
while getting clear on how indicative conditionals work might tell us
something important about which aspects of content are compositional, it
does not seem likely to explain why the main premises in arguments like
(33) seem acceptable.

Let us take stock. We started with some puzzling data about reactions to
sentences that look like logical truths, namely, that vagueness seems to
threaten the law of excluded middle but not, in the first instance, the
law of non-contradiction. And we proposed a theory, COP, that could
explain this data, whether or not one accepted that all theorems of
classical logic really are logical truths. Already, though, there was
some difficulty about whether this explanation was consistent with an
epistemic account of vagueness. We then noted some further data,
concerning speakers' willingness to accept the law of excluded middle in
some circumstances, but not accept some complex instances of the law of
non-contradiction in others, that could not be explained by COP. So we
posited a modification of COP, POP, that could explain even this new
data. Unlike COP, POP did require us to assume that all truths of
classical logic really are logical truths, but like COP, it was far from
clear that POP was compatible with an epistemic account of vagueness. At
this stage it looked as if we had something like an argument for a
broadly supervaluational account of vagueness, or at least for some
account of vagueness that preserves much of classical logic while
accepting that vagueness is semantic indeterminacy. The considerations
of this last section suggest we should our temper our enthusiasm for
that argument somewhat, because they show that epistemicism *might* be
compatible with POP. If both epistemicism and supervaluationism are
compatible with POP, and each of them, when combined with POP, can
explain all of our intuitions about the logic of sentences containing
vague terms, then we must find some other means than intuitive
plausibility to separate those two theories.

[^1]: Though as [@Jackson1998 37] notes, when philosophers say,
    'Intuitively, $p$', where $p$ might be a proposition to the effect
    that such-and-such an example is or is not a case of knowledge, or
    causation, or justice, or whatever, the only evidence they usually
    have that $p$ really is intuitive is their own intuitions, and
    perhaps those of a few colleagues or students. And my intuitions
    about whether speakers in general are disposed to assent to certain
    sentences is a better guide to the facts than my intuitions about
    causation, knowledge or justice, because in the former case, but
    arguably not the latter, my intuitions are partially constitutive of
    the facts, since I am one of the speakers in question.

[^2]: See, for instance, [@Machina1976 183-5], [@Tye1994 194] and
    [@Parsons2000 71] for acknowledgements of this and attempts at
    explanation.

[^3]: See, for instance, [@Keefe2000 164], who proposes an similar,
    though less wide-ranging, explanation to the one I will provide
    below.

[^4]: This might not be a dramatic difference if one thinks that
    children learn their native language by a process similar to that
    which the radical translator learns the foreign language, though
    such an assumption seems to be rather implausible these days
    [@Laurence2001].

[^5]: As a few authors have stressed, for example @Sanford1976, @Tye1990
    and @Tappenden1993, there is also an argument that we should not
    assent to (3), based on the intuition that if a disjunction is true
    then there must be an answer to the question, "Well, which of its
    disjuncts is true then?" While this argument can be directly
    challenged, and has been by @Dummett1975, it nevertheless provides
    some reason for thinking that the intuition that (3) cannot be
    properly asserted will survive into equilibrium.

[^6]: Such as @Machina1976, @Tye1994 and @Parsons2000. The scare quotes
    here are because we do not learn a lot about the nature of a *logic*
    from knowing how many distinct values there are in a particular
    semantic model of it. Even classical logic has many-valued models,
    but that does not make classical logic a many-valued logic in the
    salient sense. The logics in question here have recently been called
    'fuzzy logics' by @Bonini1999-BONOTP and @Priest2001. This seems to
    be a mistake -- fuzzy logic is a specific research program based on
    work by Zadeh (especially his [-@Zadeh1965]) that differs in some
    important ways from the theories Machina, Tye and Parsons defend,
    particularly in its treatment of higher order vagueness.

[^7]: Such as @Fine1975a and @Keefe2000. The supervaluational position
    defended by @McGee1995 is harder to classify here because they
    recognise two concepts of truth, and only on one of them are (1) and
    (2) both not true.

[^8]: All borrowed, more or less literally, from @Grice1989.

[^9]: Contra the suggestions of @Wittgenstein1953 [@Hart1961; @Ryle1949]
    in the cases of (5), (6) and (7).

[^10]: In using this term I do not mean to endorse *all* of the details
    of the views of @BarwisePerry1983; I merely use it as the least
    loaded term available in the circumstances. If one so desires, one
    can understand 'situations' to be centred possible worlds in
    everything that follows.

[^11]: The vagueness will not be directly relevant *here*. For most (but
    not all) of the points I want to make below, we could instead use
    (8$^\prime$) (8$^\prime$)Katie drank a bottle of scotch and drove
    home.

    It is convenient to have a sentence that does not *say* that the
    drinks were alcoholic, so we will stay with (8) for now. I am
    grateful to a conversation Peter Smith for clearing up some of the
    possible confusions here.

[^12]: [@Stanley2000-STAOQD 230] use 'communicated' here, which is
    probably more perspicuous in virtue of being less technical. Note
    that when I say that the semantic content is an unstructured entity,
    a set of situations, I do not rule out the possibility that the
    sentence has that content in virtue of expressing a structured
    proposition.

[^13]: Though not universally; see @Schiffer1987 and @McGee1991.

[^14]: Of course not quite everyone joins the consensus, most
    prominently @McGee1985. Still, the principle is called the
    Uncontested Principle by @Jackson1987, so my claim that it is a
    consensus is not exactly idiosyncratic.

[^15]: That last claim is contentious. Grice only needs the premise that
    things are *as if* the theory I am about to describe is true, and
    even if that theory is false, it is possible that the relevant
    things are as if the theory is true.

[^16]: [@Stanley2000-STAOQD 231] say that "Cases where the speaker knows
    the proposition communicated without the proposition expressed ...
    are highly exceptional." The above considerations seem to suggest
    either that indicative conditionals, or at least indicative
    conditionals whose antecedents typically carry Gricean implicatures,
    are exceptional cases or that Stanley and Szabó's claim is mistaken.

[^17]: I am indebted here to conversations with Tim Maudlin and Brian
    McLaughlin.

[^18]: Various writers use 'clearly' or 'definitely' where I use
    'determinately'. Nothing of any importance turns on this.

[^19]: Or perhaps most. Little will turn on this here, but the ability
    of supervaluational theories to handle various paradoxes (such as
    the Sorites and the problem of the many) might depend on just how
    this principle is framed. For salient discussion on this point see
    @Lewis1993c.

[^20]: Following @Barwise1981, @Higginbotham1981 and, most directly,
    @Neale1990

[^21]: Nothing turns on it here, but whether the box at the front of
    (20a) should be there depends on just what the logical form of *No
    Fs are Gs* is. I have assumed, without any good reason, that it is
    $\neg$\[$\exists x$: *Fx*\](*Gx*), but other interpretations are
    possible. Nothing turns on it because however we write (20), (20a)
    will be true.

[^22]: I assume there is no vagueness concerning where Louis was born,
    though of course there is a faint possibility that this would be
    vague. The analogy is both drawn and alleged to be supported by data
    in @Bonini1999-BONOTP.

[^23]: In an earlier draft of *The General Theory* [@Keynes1934] this
    premise is more explicit: "\[F\]inished goods fall into two classes
    according as the effective demand for them depends predominantly on
    expectations of consumers' demand \[i.e. they are consumption
    goods\] or partly on expectations of consumers' demand and partly on
    another factor conveniently summed up as the rate of interest \[i.e.
    they are investment goods\]." (428) Two pages later Keynes
    explicitly acknowledges that any division of real-world goods into
    categories such as these will be more than a little 'arbitrary', but
    claims that anything that is true on any arbitrary way of drawing
    the line is after all, true. It is unfortunate, but surely
    insignificant, that this premise was not left explicit in the final
    draft. Keynes's position, of acknowledging the distinction to be
    vague but reasoning as if a line had been drawn is repeated in many
    economics texts.

[^24]: Even if it cannot be so viewed, (23) might still count as being a
    contradiction under a more liberal definition of what constitutes a
    contradiction.

[^25]: It does seem rather surprising to think that autobiographical
    facts like this could effect the plausibility of a theory; so
    surprising in fact that one might view it as a problem for the
    prediction/retrodiction distinction. But that is a matter for a
    paper far removed from this one.

[^26]: When we are just investigating the objective pragmatic content of
    conditionals and disjunctions this condition is relatively easy to
    interpret. Some complications arise because POP, like COP, is
    intended to apply to quantified sentences as well, and indeed mimic
    COP's explanation of why (17) is not assertable though (19) is. The
    intent here is that the *Gx* in \[$\exists x$: *Fx*\]*Gx* should
    count as a sentence for purposes as POP.

[^27]: David Sanford (1976) stresses the related point that we will not
    assert (and indeed deny) sentences of the form *There is an n that a
    person is tall iff they are over n nm in height*.

[^28]: And we will assume, somewhat rashly, that poverty supervenes on
    net wealth. It is not altogether clear that, say, a person with \$1
    billion in real assets, and \$1 billion in liquid assets, and \$2
    billion in long-term debts is in any sense poor. Following
    philosophical tradition, however, we will assume that they are.

[^29]: I am grateful here to conversations with Ted Sider.

[^30]: It is actually rather hard to see just what the epistemicist
    explanation of the Sorites is -- there is nothing in
    @Williamson1994-WILV saying just exactly why the epistemicist thinks
    we see these premises as being true.

    The pragmatic theories of vagueness, defended by @Raffman1994 and
    @Soames1999 seem to have a chance of drawing a distinction between
    (32) and (34), which is a positive feature of those theories. But
    those theories seem to have more pressing problems, as
    @Robertson2000 outlines.

[^31]: Cited in van Fraassen (1980)

[^32]: As, for instance, the analyses of indicative conditionals in
    @Stalnaker1975-STAIC [@Davis1979] and @Weatherson2001-WEAIAS are.

[^33]: If one is wedded to a particular analyses of the indicative
    conditional, this move might seem a little quick. But if you think,
    as I do, that we do not know very much at all about the similarity
    metric relevant for assessing indicative conditionals, other than
    that it is sensitive to epistemic considerations and to salience,
    then we can take the little pattern of reasoning in the text to be a
    discovery about the nature of that metric.
